SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT




SECTION 11. ENGINE A ND PROPEL L ER
SELECTIONAND INSTALLATION
Engine installation is one of the most time consuming and most important phases of construction. Although it
is extremely important that everything be done correctly, these instructions are not very specific at times.
This is intentional. The wide variation of possible engine/propeller combinations means there may be more
than one "right way". In most respects, the engine installation in an RV is just like that of any other airplane
using the same engine. The same "quality control" rules and practices which apply to factory aircraft apply to
homebuilts as well.
To help simplify the process, Vans has developed Firewall Forward Installation kits for the Lycoming engines
that we sell. We will briefly consider a number of common points in this section, but for detailed drawings and
instructions you will need to buy the Firewall Forward documentation, which is available separately from the
Firewall Forward kits.
RECOMMENDED ENGINE INSTALLATION MANUAL
One of the books recommended in Section 1, Firewall Forward by Tony Bingelis, is an excellent reference
manual for engine installations, and contains much more detailed information than we are able to include in
this manual. This is particularly true if you choose to vary from standard procedures. We recommend
acquiring and thoroughly studying this book before beginning your engine installation. Firewall Forward is
available from the Experimental Aircraft Association, (EAA) Oshkosh, WI.

INSTALLING THE ENGINE MOUNT TO THE FUSELAGE
The typical RV engine mount is unique because it combines mounting structure for both the engine and the
main landing gear legs. (There are a couple of exceptions: RV-6A/7A/8A/9A engine mounts includes the
mount for a nose gear leg, and the landing gear in the RV-8 is mounted in the fuselage.) Because of the
gear leg mount feature and forward cockpit design, six attach points are used rather than the usual four. An
offset is built into the mount to help compensate for "P" factor, so the engine is not aligned with the airplane
centerline.
The rough position of the mount is shown by the pre-punched tooling holes in the firewall. Do NOT simply drill
the tooling holes to 3/8. Offer the mount to the firewall, and use some long 3/16 bolts to attach it. The holes in
the weldment will likely not align perfectly as the weldments vary slightly. It may be necessary to pull the part
into alignment, and/or file the 3/16 tooling holes to shift them slightly. If the mount is not exactly centered on
the firewall, that is OK. 3/8" either side to side or up and down will make no difference.

With the mount thus attached to the firewall, drill the holes out to 3/8 using the mount as a guide, and insert
3/8 bolts as you proceed. Any gap between the firewall and mount will usually disappear when the fasteners
are tightened. If the gap is still there when the nuts are appropriately torqued, AN9790 washers may be used
to eliminate it.
CONICAL ENGINE MOUNT INSTALLATION
The conical engine mount supplied with the kit has the correct alignments built in. It simply bolts to the
firewall.
Attaching a conical mount engine is relatively easy because all four bolts through the engine case are
parallel. The conical rubber mounts that give the mounting style its name are set into the recesses in the
engine case, the engine is mated to the mount and the bolts installed. Tightening all bolts evenly will position
the engine correctly.
Van's does not stock the rubber isolation mounts for conical engines, but recommends that the builder buy
mounts listed for production types using the same engine: Piper Tri-Pacers, for instance, used 0-320 conical
mount engines, and RV builders have used these isolation mounts successfully.

DYNAFOCAL ENGINE MOUNT lNSTALLATION
Study the construction drawings until you understand the correct placement of the isolation mounts and
washers. (Isolation mounts and mounting bolt kits are available through Van's Accessories Catalog.
Because the mounting bolt kits must supply all the washers for builders installing used isolation mounts, if
you buy both new isolation mounts and a new bolt kit, you will probably end up with some duplication and
some extra large washers if you order new isolation mounts. Throw them in your spare hardware box. Use


sect 11r7 11/14/07                             11-1
     RV AIRCRAFT                                         SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION


     only the number and type of washers shown on the drawing.)
     Mounting a dynafocal engine is a bit more difficult because of the converging lines of the mount bolts. The
     rubber isolation mounts (commonly known as "Lord" mounts, although Lord is a specific brand name and
     there are several other brands) are designed so they align when tightened and compressed. The bolt holes
     through the four mounts will not coincide with the holes in the engine case at repose (no compression load).
     When installing the engine, it is necessary to have it suspended from a hoist. When the engine is
     suspended, it can be moved into position on the engine mount and the two upper isolation mounts and bolts
     installed and partially tightened. Then, by lifting the engine with the hoist, and actually lifting part of the
     airframe weight too, the upper isolation mounts are flexed upward enough that the lower mounts are brought
     (almost) into position. Basically, the technique is to get one or more bolts started, and then force the engine
     in the opposite direction so that remaining bolt holes can be aligned. We have found that the best place to
     start is the top.
     Once in place, tightening is easy. The bolt simply "bottoms out" on the steel tube insert that passes through
     the center of the isolators.

     EXHAUST SYSTEM
     Probably the first thing that should be installed on the engine, once it is mounted on the airframe, is the
     exhaust system. This is the big, hot, unmovable item which cables and fuel lines must be routed around.
     Several suppliers have made systems available specifically for RVs. Be sure to specify your aircraft type and
     engine model when you discuss requirements with your supplier. Beautifully made stainless steel exhaust
     systems for all RVs are available through Van's Accessories Catalog.
     If you prefer to do your own exhaust system fabrication, you can save some money. Unless you are a very
     talented welder, you will want to use mild steel automotive exhaust pipe instead of stainless. A good place to
     start is to purchase the required exhaust flange, some 1-3/4" exhaust pipe of the thinnest wall thickness
     available, and several 6" radius "U" bends of 1-3/4" dia. These pipes can be cut into sections for the various
     curves needed. By splicing together a number of these bends, a satisfactory system can be made
     inexpensively, but it will weigh more than the stainless system. However, there is a lot of labor involved, and
     we have found that nearly all builders prefer to purchase a ready made exhaust system.

     THROTTLE CONTROL
     The standard throttle differs between the side-by-side and tandem airplanes. In the side-by-side RVs it is a
     locking push/pull control in the center. Installation is straightforward; through the firewall and to the control
     arm on the carb. The tandem airplanes use a throttle quadrant, mounted on the left sidewall of the cockpit.
     Cables are available through Van's Accessories Catalog.

     MIXTURE CONTROL
     Although they are not used on production aircraft, a medium duty "choke cable" can be used for a mixture
     cable. A cable with a core wire diameter of 0.062 to 0.070" works well. The flexible cable makes routing
     easy and the solid core is quickly trimmed to the exact length required. The cable must be must be anchored
     at some point near the arm on the carb to insure positive control.
     Many builders may prefer more traditional vernier or quadrant cables. These are usually fitted with rodend
     bearings that connect to the mixture arm on the carburetor. Fittings, special washers, and hardware for
     anchoring and connecting the engine end of throttle and mixture cables are offered in Van's Accessories
     Catalog.

     TACHOMETER DRIVE
     The Lycoming engine is equipped with a mechanical tachometer drive. A cable turned by this drive is
     connected directly to a mechanical tachometer on the instrument panel. The cable can be made to order by
     any automotive speedometer shop, or ordered from various homebuilt aircraft supply shops. Routing should
     maximize the bend radius of the tach drive line to prevent excess friction, wear, and premature breakage.
     Electronic tachometers are also widely available and should be installed using the manufacturer's
     instructions.

     FUEL LINES
     Fuel lines up to fuel filter (gascolator) can be 3/8" soft aluminum tubes, just like the remainder of the system
     back to the tanks. However, since there is relative motion between the engine and the airframe, flexible lines
     must be used for routing the fuel from the fuselage to the engine mounted fuel pump.
     One good hose for this purpose is Aeroquip 701, a medium pressure hose with a stainless steel wire braid
     shield on the outside. It is available for use with reusable fittings and hose assemblies can easily be
     fabricated by the homebuilder. Wherever possible, hoses should be routed so there is "slack" or "bows" in


sect 11 r7 11/14/07                            11-2
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT

the line to permit easy movement and flexing due to engine vibration, and to lessen the load on end fittings.
Fuel lines should not be installed straight and tight between the accessories. Fuel lines should also avoid
close proximity to exhaust pipes, or should be thermally insulated if close routing is unavoidable. Sometimes
a heat shield must be installed to shield the fuel lines.
Thermal insulation of all fuel lines within the engine compartment is recommended even if proximity to
exhaust pipes is not a factor. During operation, the air temperature within the lower rear portion of the engine
compartment (where these fuel lines are located) can rise to a level sufficient to vaporize fuel within the lines
and thus cause vapor lock. The engine will run rough or stop. This condition is likely to occur during ground
operation where engine cooling is marginal because of limited ram air flow through the engine compartment,
and because fuel flow volume is low. With a high air temperature and low fuel flow, the fuel has more time to
heat up and possibly vaporize before entering the carb or fuel injector. This situation is further complicated
by the use of auto fuel which normally has a lower vaporization temperature than Avgas. One product often
used for thermal protection of fuel lines is Aeroquip Firesleeve, which, as the name implies, is a hose-like
cover installed over the fuel line and clamped at both ends. As the name also implies, this material is
designed to protect the fuel lines (or oil and hydraulic lines) from the direct flames of an engine compartment
fire. Assembled fuel and oil lines are available from Vans in lengths suitable for most RV installations.
NOTE: Automotive type hose and hose fittings are not acceptable for use in aircraft engine or fuel line
installations. Never use the type of fittings that require the hose (without flared nut end fittings) to slip over a
male fitting and be secured with a hose clamp. Even for low pressure or suction lines, "tube fitting" hose
assemblies should be used, not hose fittings (clamps). NEVER use an aluminum, copper or other rigid fuel
line to connect the fuel system from the fuselage to the engine. It is almost certain to fail, with serious
consequences. This applies to fuel pressure lines and oil pressure lines also. When fabricating fuel line
assemblies, check for line blockage after installing the end fittings. Sometimes the tip of the inner fitting can
gouge out bits of the soft rubber from the inside of the hose, and these can flip up like a butterfly valve and
block the line.

OIL PRESSURE GAUGE LINE
A braided Aeroquip hose similar to fuel lines, is recommended between the oil port on the engine and the
fuselage. 1/4" diameter or smaller is adequate because it is just a pressure line with no volume flow
requirement. Generally a bulkhead fitting is used in the firewall, with an aluminum or copper line running
back to the oil pressure gauge in the panel. Use of an electrical oil pressure sensor would eliminate the need
for these lines and routing.
A restrictor fitting should be used in the engine oil port to limit oil loss in the event of line failure. If not readily
available, a restrictor fitting can be made by taking a standard AN fitting, tapping the inside of the pipe thread
port for a bolt thread, screwing the bolt in tight, cutting it off flush with the end of the fitting, and then drilling
the smallest possible hole through the plug. Welding could also be used to form the plug.
Sensors should not be mounted directly on the engine case or rigid mountings, like pipe nipples, mounted to
the case. The vibration will eventually cause the fitting to break, letting the engine pump pressurized oil
overboard. The sensor is mounted on the firewall and connected to the engine with a flexible hose.

FUEL PRESSURE GA UGE L INE
This should be a hose tapped into the fuel line somewhere between the fuel pump and the carb, and should
be routed to a bulkhead fitting on the firewall, and then to the fuel pressure gauge. If an electric gauge is
used, the sensor may be mounted on the firewall and connected to the fitting with a flexible line.
A Tee fitting on the "out" port of the fuel pump is a good source for the fuel pressure line. A restrictor fitting,
like that described for the oil pressure line, should be used at the source end of the fuel pressure line.

MANIFOLD PRESSURE LINE
A good source for this is the primer port of the left rear cylinder (#4). The line may be 1/8" copper tubing with
compression fittings and a "vibration loop". Route it through a fitting on the firewall similar to other lines.
Even though there is no flow through the manifold pressure line, a restrictor with a small orifice is still a good
idea. Sonic waves can cause fuel vapors to move through the line and condense in the instrument. Also, the
rapidly varying pressure caused by the valves opening and closing can cause the gauge to flutter wildly and
become unreadable.

PRIMER SYSTEM
The Lycoming 0-320 and 0-360 carbureted engines can be primed for cold starting by cycling the accelerator
pump with the throttle (0-235 engines do not have an accelerator pump). This can be effective for
temperatures down to freezing or slightly below, but will depend on the idle mixture adjustment and jetting of
the specific carb. If starting is routinely required at sub-freezing temperatures, installation of a conventional
hand operated primer system will probably be necessary. Priming three cylinders will be sufficient (one
cylinder's primer port has probably been used for a manifold pressure source).


sect 11r7 11/14/07                                11-3
     RV AIRCRAFT                                         SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION
     Plunger type primers, as used on many light aircraft, work well, but require a separate system. On
     carbureted engines, you may also prime the cylinders using pressure supplied by the boost pump. Primer
     lines are routed from a port on the gascolator to the cylinders and flow is controlled by a small solenoid-
     controlled valve installed between the gascolator and the cylinders. When the pump is on, the lines are
     pressurized, the solenoid is activated by a momentary switch in the cockpit and fuel flows to the cylinders.
     The only known disadvantage is that the primer system is dependent on the battery for operation. If the
     battery were dead, the engine could not be primed manually.

     INDUCTION AIR INTAKE
     Most RVs are fitted with the filtered airboxes available in Van's Accessories Catalog. Different airboxes are
     necessary for different sizes of engines and types of induction devices, so be sure you order and install the
     airbox appropriate to your airplane.
     All of the optional air intake systems are designed to offer a minimum frontal area and flow resistance to the
     incoming air. The intake systems also provide excellent manifold pressure from the ram air effect with little
     complexity or weight.

     FUEL BOOST PUMP
     Because of the low (below carb level) location of the wing fuel tanks, an RV must be equipped with a fuel
     boost pump as back up for the engine driven pump. Usually the boost pump is a small electric pump, an
     example of which (p/n ES 40108 in Van's Accessories Catalog) is shown in the fuselage plans. Other pumps
     and installation locations may be used. However, some pumps are not self-priming and must be located at or
     below tank level. Check the pump manufacture's specifications about this.
     When using a fuel injection system or a pressure carb, a high-pressure boost pump and a high-pressure
     engine driven pump (quite different than those used on carbureted engines) are required. These pumps are
     also available from Van's.

     ENGINE BAFFLING
     Section 12 includes a basic explanation of cooling theory and baffling. Prefabricated baffle kits are available
     as an option through Van's Accessories Catalog and should save the builder a lot of time. These kits include
     pre-formed aluminum baffling, cowl seal material, and all the hardware and instructions needed. Drawing
     and patterns are also available for those masochists who wish to make their own baffles.
     Inter-cylinder baffles are normally supplied as a part of the engine. They are essential to proper cooling, and
     the exact shape, size, and fit should be maintained if these baffles are being fabricated rather than using the
     Lycoming parts. Intercylinder baffles are not included in Van's baffle kits.

     ENGINE BREA THER LINE
     An engine crankcase breather line is needed to run from the breather port on the upper rear engine case, to
     an overboard dump point. Because there are often droplets of oil included in the blow-by air exiting the
     engine crankcase, breather tubes are a major cause of dirty fuselage bottoms. This can be partially avoided
     by positioning the breather line outlet so that its contents are blown directly onto the exhaust pipes and
     burned. The breather line itself can be 5/8" I.D. radiator hose except for the end closest to the exhaust pipe
     which should be aluminum or steel tubing.
     A relief hole should be drilled in the line several inches above the exit. If the breather line plugs or freezes
     shut, the pressure build-up inside the crankcase can blow the front crankshaft seal out of the engine, causing
     the rapid loss of oil and engine failure.
     Breather separators are available. Usually mounted on the firewall, these units receive the direct line from
     the breather outlet and use a screen and sump to separate the oil from the gasses. A vent line is run
     overboard for the gasses, and the separator must be drained and cleaned periodically. It's a messy job, but
     many builders prefer it to constantly cleaning the bottom of their airplanes.

     CARB AND CABIN HEAT MUFFS
     The carb air intake box previously described uses air from the hot air side of the engine cooling system for
     alternate air and/or carb heat. While this has proven adequate on the prototype RVs, each builder will have
     to evaluate his own installation based the likelihood of carb ice in his intended operating environment. The
     air intake box could be altered so that a completely sealed carb heat system could be used, or one could run
     a 2" air hose from a heat muff and position it to feed into the alternate air inlet of the carb air box without
     being attached and closed. At least exhaust heated air would be available for carb heat rather than just
     engine heated air.
     The heat muff aluminum sleeve, fabricated to fit around a straight portion of an exhaust pipe. A muff 6-12
     inches in length should be enough to supply heat for the carb and the cabin. Note that the clean air intake is
     located on the forward cowl baffle, from which air is routed into the heat muff. The object of this is to assure
     that un-contaminated air is heated and routed to the cabin. Other homebuilts have used a much simpler


sect 11 r7 11/14/07                            11-4
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT


system, taking warm air directly from the engine compartment, through a simple door on the firewall, and
using it for the cockpit heat. This is a potentially very hazardous practice, as engine compartment air can
contain exhaust from gasket leaks, smoke from burned oil, etc. If a heat muff were being made strictly for
carb heat air, it could intake engine compartment air without risk of problems.

OIL COOLER
Any of the oil coolers typically used in production airplane installations should work well in an RV. The cooler
may be installed on the rear vertical baffle behind cylinder #4, with air admitted through a hole through the
baffle, or on the firewall with a shroud and a SCAT tube supplying pressurize air from the baffle plenum.
Baffles should be reinforced to withstand the weight of the cooler and lines. Oil lines from the ports on the
rear case, typically 3/8" for the 0-320 and'/2" for larger engines, should be AEROQUIP 701 or equivalent.
The size of oil cooler necessary for a specific engine is difficult to specify. Engines seem to be quite
individual in their needs, and even engines and airplanes of the exact same type will run "hot" or "cool" with
the same cooler. The only general rule of thumb seems to be the bigger the engine, the bigger the cooler.
10-360 200 hp engines use oil to cool the piston skirts and are more dependent on oil coolers than their
parallel valve cousins. We have found the Stewart-Warner coolers work better than the Positech coolers on
the 200 hp engine.

ENGINE SELECTION
The RV-4 and RV-6/6A are designed to use Lycoming (1)0-320 (150 & 160 HP) and (1)0-360 (180 HP)
engines. The RV-7/7A and RV-8/8A will accept these engines and and have the added option of the 200 hp
Lycoming angle valve 10-360. The RV-3 and RV-9A are designed for Lycoming 0-235, 0-290 and 0-320
engines rated between 118 hp and 160 hp.
At a glance it would appear that you have four choices of engines: 150, 160, 180, and 200 HP. Actually, it is
a bit more complex than that. The engine list at the end of this section includes approximately 200 individual
model numbers for individual engine variations encompassed within these two general engine types. The
letters and numbers in the engine model number each refer to some feature of that engine. By becoming
familiar with these designators, primarily the prefix and suffix numbers and letters, you can select the engine
best suited to your needs by matching the features on the engine to your needs or preferences.
A guide for to Lycoming designator symbols is presented at the end of this chapter. Below is a sample
engine model number with a point-by-point description of features:
• 10-320-D1 A
• I: Fuel Injected.
• 0: Designates a Horizontally Opposed cylinder placement.
• 320: Engine displacement in cubic inches.
• D: High (8.5:1) compression ratio; meaning 160 HP and a 100 Octane fuel required.
• 1: Controllable Propeller. Engine is suitable for constant speed prop.
• A: Rear Mounted Accessories, Bendix Magnetos.
NOTE: There are two styles of Dynafocal mounts. Dynafocal I and Dynafocal II. Dynafocal II engines are
scarce in the used engine market and not available as "new" through our OEM agreement with Textron-
Lycoming. Van's Aircraft will not supply mounts for this type of engine.
A list of engine identifiers to avoid follows: (the letters listed below are the "first" letter after the cubic inch
number: example, IO-320B2A is Dynafocal II and is to be avoided.
IO-320A,B or C, IO-360E (180HP), IO-360D (200HP)
There is a wealth of information in these lists, (which may not be complete down to the most recent engines)
but they often seem like a treasure hunt when you are trying to find specific information.
How much horsepower? The RV series was designed around the most plentiful and reliable of aircraft
engines, the Lycoming 0-320. In production since the early 1950s, this engine has proven to be one of the
most reliable internal combustion devices ever built. There are two basic versions, and a vast array of
different models and sub-models.
The low compression (approx. 7:1) version is rated at 150 hp and designed for 80 octane fuel. The high
compression (approx. 8.5:1) develops 160 hp and is designed for 100LL. Low compression engines are
often modified to produce 160 hp, but this is NOT sanctioned or approved by Lycoming.
The 0-360 (or its cousin, the parallel valve 10-360) develop 180 hp on 100LL.
An RV with 150 hp is not an underpowered airplane. Remember, this is the same engine that drags four
place production airplanes around. Installed in the light, clean RV, it provides excellent performance.

sect 11r7 11/14/07                              11-5
     RV AIRCRAFT                                         SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION

     Installing higher powered engines usually increases the climb rate, shortens the take off and increases the
     cruise and top speeds slightly. There is a price, of course; power comes from gasoline, not the engine. If
     you use the extra power needed for better performance, you will burn more fuel.
     Although the temptation to install the biggest engine and get the most performance is great, remember, even
     with the lowest horsepower, a clean RV is capable of speeds very close to the published VNE. Engines with
     more horsepower can easily drive the airplane past redline in level flight. Just because you can install a big
     engine doesn't mean it is a smart thing to do.
     What model? The rumor that Lycoming once built two identical engines has never been proven. The variety
     is so large t at Van's often (very often) cannot offer advice on whether a specific model will work in an RV.
     Remember, you, the builder, are ultimately responsible for making sure the engine you acquire will fit your
     airplane. Here are a few tips to help with engine shopping:
     • Mounting Style: Lycoming engines have been built in three basic mounting styles, conical, Dynafocal 1
        and Dynafocal 2. The difference is in the angle that the engine mount bolts form with the crankshaft.
        An engine mount to fit any of these is available from Van's, although the Dynafocal 2 mount is a special
        order item, requiring extra time to supply.
     • Induction: One of the critical items in determining whether an engine will fit in an RV is the placement of
         the "induction device", the carburetor or fuel injection servo. In an effort to accommodate airframe
         manufacturers, engines have been developed with several different carb locations.
     • Aft mounted carbs, feeding through the side of the oil sump, will not fit an RV. However, often a change
         of sump to an updraft version is all that is required to make the engine fit.
     • Most engines with updraft carbs will fit an RV, but some engines have the carb mounted at the very rear
        of the sump, which interferes with the RV-6A nose gear mount.
     • In general, any engine with a forward facing or vertical induction device on the middle or front of the
         sump will work.
     • Fuel pumps: The low wing design of the RVs requires an engine driven fuel pump. Since many engines
        on the used market originally powered high wing airplanes with gravity feed systems, they do not have
        fuel pumps. Usually it is relatively simple to convert an engine without a fuel pump, but this matter should
        be checked. Carbureted and injected engines require different pumps, so check carefully.
     • "Different" engines: The 0-320-H2AD engine, used for several years in the C-172, is a special case. It
         is unrelated to the rest of the 0-320 family, and requires a special mount, which Van's can supply upon
         request. It also has a pad for a forward mounted fuel pump, but, since the C-172 does not require a
         pump, none was ever installed. The case must be opened and modified to operate an engine driven
         mechanical pump.
     • Some engine models we have encountered that will NOT fit in an RV, at least without modification,
         include the 10-320-B1A and the 0-360-A4K. This is by no means a complete list.
     • Note that the 200 hp 10-360 angle valve engine is not recommended for the RV-4 or RV-6/6A. It is
         physically larger than the parallel valve 180 hp 10 and 0-360s and will not fit without major modifications
        to the cowl. It may, however, be used in the RV-7/7A or RV-8/8A.

     PROPEL L ER SELECTION
     The RV builder has four propeller options to consider: fixed pitch wood, fixed pitch metal, and constant speed
     metal or constant-speed wood/composite. Just to make it more complicated, the wood/composite props
     feature either hydraulic or electric actuation. The metal constant speed props are hydraulically actuated.
     Traditionally, metal props have been used on production light aircraft because they offered the best
     compromise of performance and serviceability. A fixed pitch metal prop will usually weigh about two or three
     times more than a wood prop. For a 150-180 HP engine, this represents a difference of about 17-22 lbs.
     The metal prop, because of the greater strength of the material, can be made with a thinner airfoil section
     and is generally considered more efficient than a wood prop. This means more overall performance. Not
     necessarily significantly more performance, but more than enough to justify the added weight.
     All of the fixed pitch metal props manufactured to fit factory designs powered by 0-320 and 0-360 engines
     were designed for much slower airplanes so their pitch angles are much too low to be effective at RV cruise
     speed. While it is true that metal props can be re-pitched for more or less speed, they cannot be re-pitched
     to the extent needed for an RV. In addition to a loss of efficiency incurred through excessive re-pitching, the
     stress on the metal renders them unsafe. The stresses on metal props are very involved, and are caused by
     harmonic vibrations which cannot be felt by the pilot. Extensively reworked metal props have a history of
     losing sections of their blades without warning. The result is a catastrophic imbalance, capable of tearing the
     engine completely free of the mount and airframe before the pilot can react. People have died.
     The onlvfixed pitch metal props suitable for RVs are the Sensenich 70CM for the 0-320, and the Sensenich
     72FM for the 0-360. As this is written, testing is expected to begin soon to determine the suitability of the
     72FM on the 10-360 200 hp engine.

sect 11 r7 11/14/07                           11-6
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT

Because metal props have not been available, wood props have been, and still are, widely used. These
have both advantages and disadvantages compared to the metal prop.
DISADVANTAGES:
• The finish of wood props will deteriorate and weather-check over a period of time and require refinishing
    every 2-5 years depending on operating conditions.
• Wood props suffer when flown in rain. While most wood props now offer some form of leading edge
   protection, usually a tough cast urethane leading edge inlay, rain damage is still a concern. Even a short
   time at reduced rpm in heavy rain will cause enough damage to require refinishing.
• Wood props are lighter, but this is a mixed blessing. While the lower weight is of benefit in keeping the
   empty weight of the airplane down and the useful load up, it does have disadvantages. The lightweight
   wood prop has less inertia and therefore puts greater strain on the starter because there is less propeller
   flywheel effect to carry through the compression stroke. For the same reason, engines equipped with
   wood props will not idle as slowly or as smoothly as they would with metal props. Many RV pilots with
   wood props find that when they are operating in the cross-country mode, with baggage and a passenger,
   the CG is near the aft limit. A heavier prop on the front may actually allow more weight to be carried.
• Wood is an organic material, and even though wood props are varnished and painted, they expand and
   contract with the weather. This means the pilot must pay constant attention to the torque values of the
   bolts holding the prop to the airplane.
ADVANTAGES
• One problem with fixed pitch props on fast airplanes is that it is difficult to get the correct combination of
    static and cruise RPM. We have to compromise, accepting less static RPM (less thrust, take-off, climb,
    etc.) than we would like, and also accepting some engine overspeed to achieve max. power cruise. Our
    experience has been that wood props offer the advantage of a lower RPM spread than do the metal
    props.
• Wood props are considerably smoother. This is not particularly noticeable until one has flown behind a
   well balanced wood prop for awhile, and then changes back to a metal prop. The normal reaction is
   wanting to land immediately because of the rough engine operation. The difference is really quite
   noticeable. This experience alone has caused some builders to throw away the metal prop forever.
• While we would rather not think about such things, wood props will help protect the engine from internal
   damage in the event of a prop strike. Because the prop breaks readily, the force transmitted to the
   engine will not be as sudden and as violent as with a similar strike with a metal prop. Wood props are far
   cheaper than engine crankshafts, and replacing one may cost less than repairing a bent metal prop.
In the real world, the cost of the fixed pitch metal and wood props is not greatly different. The extras required
by a wood prop; extension, crush plate, bolts, etc., are included in the price of the metal prop. The metal
prop should outlast the wood prop and requires less maintenance.
Fixed pitch propellers fall into two general categories: "climb" props and "cruise" props.
A"Cruise" prop is one with a high pitch angle which will produce more thrust and speed at a given RPM. A
"Climb" prop is one with a low pitch angle which will permit the engine to attain a higher RPM at low speeds,
thus produce more power which will result in a higher climb rate. But, we need to know much more than that
in order to make a wise prop selection. Assuming that both the cruise and the climb props have the same
blade efficiency, each will produce the same airspeed for a given power output. Note that we said "Power
Output", not RPM. They are not necessarily the same. Power output varies not only with RPM but also with
manifold pressure. Manifold pressure is determined primarily by the amount of throttle opening. (This is a
powerful argument for having a manifold gauge in your fixed pitch airplane, even though this is not standard
practice in factory aircraft.)
RPM is determined largely by the load on the prop, which is determined by prop diameter and pitch, and
aircraft forward speed. To simplify this explanation, let's consider a 160 HP RV-6 cruising at 8000 ft. with the
throttle wide open. At 2600 RPM it will be developing 120 HP or 75% power, the maximum attainable output
at this altitude. Substituting a higher pitch prop will load the engine and cause RPM to drop. The drop in
RPM will cause a loss of power which means that the airplane will go slower. On the other hand, if we
substitute a lower pitch prop, the RPM will increase because of the lower work load that the engine is
subjected to, and the power output and speed increase. So, for a fixed throttle position, a high pitch ( cruise)
prop will actually cause a loss of speed, and a low pitch (performance) prop will cause a speed increase.
Because of the increased RPM with the performance prop, fuel consumption will be greater, the noise level
higher, and engine wear greater. The cruise prop will provide greater fuel efficiency, less noise, and less
engine wear.
From another perspective, let's view the different pitch props operating at a fixed engine speed, 2500 RPM
for example. The median pitch prop might require a throttle setting of 23 in. manifold pressure to achieve
2500 RPM. The low pitch performance prop might require only 21" manifold pressure, but would be slower
and burn less fuel. The high pitch cruise prop might require 25" MP for the same 2500 RPM, but would be
faster and burn more fuel. If we ignored manifold pressures and fuel consumption, it would be easy to

sect 11r7 11/14/07                             11-7
     RV AIRCRAFT                                          SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION


     conclude that the cruise prop is the fastest, but the preceding explanation showed just the reverse to be true.
     If we concluded that more pitch means more speed, we could choose a prop with a pitch so excessively high
     that we would not be able to attain 2500 RPM even at full throttle, and our take off and climb performance
     would suffer greatly. Because of the reduced RPM, power output would diminish which means less speed.
     In summary, a cruise prop is one with high pitch which will yield a high speed at a low RPM. A performance
     prop is one with low pitch which will yield more RPM at a given throttle setting, and thus more power,
     particularly for take off and climb. Since it will also (within limits) provide a higher top speed, it improves
     performance all around at the expense of higher fuel consumption and engine wear.

     CONSTANT SPEED PROPELLERS
     If you want the ultimate performance from your RV, there is no substitute for a constant speed (CS) propeller
     by a certified propeller manufacturer. (There are a number of variable pitch props under development and/or
     available for homebuilts, but none of which have been sufficiently developed or proven to warrant our
     recommendation at this time. There are also at least two prop manufacturers in Germany producing suitable
     constant-speed props, but they are very expensive.)
     Constant speed props use pressurized oil from the engine to vary the pitch of the blades. The angle is
     controlled by a governor that automatically adjusts prop pitch angles to maintain the RPM selected by the
     pilot. Van's prototypes have flown with aluminum-blade Compact Hub constant speed propellers
     manufactured by Hartzell Propeller Co. of Piqua, Ohio and composite/wood-blade constant-speed props
     manufactured by MT Propellers of Germany.
     Typical installed weight of an aluminum constant speed, including the governor and controls, will be around
     60 lbs or 35-40 lbs heavier than a fixed pitch wood prop installation. The composite/wood constant speed
     will be somewhat lighter
     Maintenance of a metal CS prop is a "Good news/Bad News" proposition. Blade maintenance will be
     minimal because of its resistance to rain erosion. However, the complex control mechanisms in the prop hub
     require periodic maintenance which must be conducted by approved prop repair facilities. This is expensive.
     Also, any damage to the blades due to striking something (like the runway) will be expensive to repair. If a
     serious prop strike does occur, it is probable that the engine crankshaft flange will also be damaged.
     The primary reason for using CS props is performance. The ability to control the prop blade angles permits
     the pilot to maximize engine and prop performance for any given flight condition. Below is a description of
     the performance offered by CS props for several flight conditions:
     • Take off: Setting a low propeller pitch reduces the prop load on the engine and permits it to rev up to full
        power RPM. The low prop pitch angle is also more efficient. A CS RV can expect take off distances to
        be reduced between 20 to 40 percent from that of a fixed pitch prop. This is a significant performance
        difference, but is not a major factor because RV take offs are short even with fixed pitch props. In other
        words, the CS prop is not as necessary on an RV as it is on most production airplanes with comparable
        top speeds, which would have unacceptable take off performance if equipped with fixed pitch props.
     • Climb: For the same reason as the take off the CS prop will improve the climb rate and climb angle.
         Climb rate will increase by approximately 10-15%, depending on the climb speed.
     • Cruise: This is the flight condition at which we feel the CS prop offers the greatest advantage to an RV.
        Most RVs will spend the majority of their flight time in cruise, so any benefit gained will be of greater
        value. Though the fixed pitch prop is operating at its best in the cruise condition, it is still a compromise.
        But, there is a wide variety of conditions which occur under the general heading of "Cruise"; anything
        from full throttle & RPM (at altitude), to just enough power to maintain minimum power flight. "Rated
        Cruise Speed" for production aircraft is quoted for conditions under which the maximum permissible
        continuous speed can be achieved. This usually occurs (for non-supercharged engine) at about 8,000 ft.
        and at maximum permissible continuous RPM. This combination produces about 75% of maximum rated
        power. Under this condition, the CS prop will offer little advantage over the fixed pitch prop, other than
        what little it may gain from better blade efficiency.
         The CS prop offers its main cruise advantage under reduced power cruise conditions. Engines operate
         at peak efficiency when the throttle is full open. This is because the air flow control vane in the carb or
         injector throttle body is completely open and offering the least resistance to airflow. This reduces what is
         known as "pumping losses" within the engine. There are two primary means (from the pilots vantage
         point) of reducing power output of an engine. One is to reduce the RPM of the engine and the other is to
         reduce the manifold pressure. With a fixed pitch prop, the only means of reducing RPM is to retard the
         throttle setting. In so doing, the control vane (butterfly) in the carb partially closes, manifold pressure is
         reduced, and engine efficiency drops. With a variable pitch (CS) prop, the RPM can be controlled
         through adjusting the blade angle, and thus the propeller load on the engine. The throttle can be left full
         open (in its most efficient position) and the power output can be reduced by lowering the RPM. This
         reduced RPM, full throttle condition achieves both reduced engine friction because of the lower RPM,
         and minimum pumping losses. Fuel efficiency will be improved, but speeds will drop because less than
         full cruise power is being used. Above we mentioned 8,000 ft. as the optimum cruise altitude. This is


sect 11r7 11/14/07                             11-8
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT

    because it s the lowest altitude at which an engine will develop no more than 75% power at rated RPM.
    With a variable pitch prop, selecting low RPM can cause the engine power output to be 75% or less at
    altitudes of less than 8,000', making it possible to utilize the efficiency of a continuous full throttle opening
    at altitudes well below 8,000'. Just leave the throttle wide open and pull the RPM back to a number
    which, according to the Lycoming manual, produces 75% power or less.
• The bottom line when analyzing prop performance and efficiency in cruising flight is fuel consumption.
    One can expect rates of 1/2 to 1 gph less than with fixed pitch wood props. Savings might be as high as
    1 1/2 gph under extreme conditions with 180 HP engines.
■   Descents: Constant speed props offer two completely different advantages over fixed pitch props during
     escents. First, they can offer added speed during long, slow descents from cruise altitude. With fixed
    pitch props, power descents are not practical because the added speed causes excessive RPM requiring
    power reduction. Constant speed props will control the RPM as speed increases in the descent. Now,
    red line speed, not RPM becomes the limiting factor.
    On the opposite end of the scale, when the throttle is retarded to idle or near idle power, the CS prop can
    be moved to low pitch which will offer noticeable aerodynamic braking action.
■   Aerobatics: During aerobatic flight, the braking action of a CS prop can help to control speed build up
    during portions of maneuvers. And, of course, its slow speed thrust advantages are helpful
    during the climbing, particularly low speed climbing, portions of the maneuvers. On the negative side, the
    added inertia of the CS prop causes greater stress on the engine crankshaft and slows down
    maneuverability to a small degree.
    Note that electrically actuated constant speed props are NOT recommended for aerobatics.

INSTAL L ING CONSTANT-SPEED PROPEL L ERS
Most constant speed props are controlled by a hydraulic governor which controls oil pressure to the prop
through a hollow crankshaft. The majority of 0-320 engines, and many 0-360 engines are not configured to
accept a hydraulic CS prop and governor. Thus, the RV builder planning to use a CS prop should shop for
the specific model engine offering CS features.
When installing a constant-speed propeller, the builder should research any operational restrictions on the
engine/prop combination under consideration. Many combinations are placarded with "avoid continuous
operation" ranges. This information can be gathered from the propeller manufacturer's Type Certificate Data
Sheets. These Data Sheets are available from the manufacturer or the FAA, and are often obtainable over
the Internet. Following is a chart summarizing some possible prop/engine combinations, but the builder is
strongly advised to do his/her own research and obtain, read, and understand the Data Sheets for the prop to
be installed. Shown here is a table of restricted operating ranges for Hartzell Compact Hub constant speed
props.
Constant-speed props should be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Bolts and hardware
for installation are supplied with new propellers. Even constant-speed props should be checked for track.

INSTALLING FIXED PITCH PROPELLERS AND PROP EXTENSIONS
The sleek shape of the RV cowl was achieved, partially, by using a spacer between the back of the fixed
pitch prop and the forward face of the crankshaft. This is called a "prop extension" although a more correct
term might be "crankshaft extension". By moving the prop forward from the crank, the designer can achieve
a more streamlined shape. See DWG C-4.
The prop extension is a very important component. It must made strong enough transmit the full power of the
engine to the propeller, and withstand the gyroscopic stress imposed by the movement of both the prop and
the aircraft. It must be made accurately enough to exactly match the bolt patterns in the crank and prop and
allow the prop to track accurately. No compromises should be accepted when considering a prop extension.
Two types of prop extensions have been used on RVs. This first is shaped like spool, with separate sets of
bolts (two sets of six, or 12 total bolts) holding the prop to the extension and the extension to the crank. This
style places the propeller 4" ahead of the crank face and fits older "fixed-pitch" cowlings. Since 1994, the
"constant speed" cowl has become standard, and a shorter, 2 1/4" cylindrical prop extension is used when a
fixed pitch propeller is installed. This extension uses six long bolts running through the spinner backplate, the
crushplate (wood prop), the prop itself, the extension and into the crank.
Depending on the engine, the bolts mounting fixed pitch props and extensions may be either 7/16" or 3/8"
diameter on the 0-320 (new 0-320s from Van's use 7/16") or 1/2" on the 0-360. Sensenich fixed pitch
metal props are supplied with the proper extension and bolts.
Prop extensions and prop extension bolts are peculiar to the experimental aircraft field. A common supply
line for these bolts has not been established within the production aircraft field. Drilled head AN bolts of the
necessary length can be easily found, but they usually have standard length threads which, for this
application, are too short. Some builders have felt that they can just take regular AN bolts and cut longer
threads on them. This should never be done! Threads on aircraft bolts are rolled, not cut. Cutting threads,

sect 11r7 11/14/07                              11-9
     RV AIRCRAFT                                           SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION


     particularly with the low quality dies found in the typical homebuilder's shop, can cause stress risers and
     eventually cracks in the bolt threads. DON'T CUT THREADS ON ANY AIRCRAFT BOLTS, ESPECIALLY
     PROP BOLTS. Having prop bolts break in flight is a terrifying and potentially deadly experience!
     Wood prop installations must have a 3/8" (minimum) aluminum faceplate under the bolt heads to protect the
     wood and provide even pressure. Bolts should be tightened to the specific torque value called out by the
     prop manufacturer. As wi!l be covered later, frequent re-torquing of prop bolts on wood props is vital to
     safety. Checking and re-setting the torque on prop bolts usually requires removing the spinner bowl and
     cutting safety wire, which often deters builders from this important preventative maintenance practice. Do not
     overlook this important safety check!
     If you are using a spool extension, we suggest using a prop crush plate designed or modified to lock the prop
     bolt heads from rotation.
     Quality prop bolts, extension bolts, prop extensions, crush plates, etc., are available through Van's
     Accessories Catalog. Consult the charts and descriptions there to determine the proper components for your
     installation.
     Both prop tip track and prop extension alignment should be checked. If the crankshaft flange is not true,
     installation of the prop extension wi!l then position the prop off center. Check the forward flange of the
     extension with a dial indicator. Common writing paper may be use as shim stock, placed between the
     crankshaft flange and the prop extension. Once this is done (if required), the prop track can be checked and
     should be within 1/16 inch. This can be adjusted with paper shims also, between the forward flange of the
     extension and the prop.

     SPECIFIC PROPS FOR RVs
     The subject of prop selection generates more questions than any other topic. Unfortunately, propeller
     performance is probably the most difficult area to quantify and define, so there are no ready answers. To
     complicate matters, there is little standardization. Propeller pitch numbers used by one manufacturer have
     no meaning when applied to another, and are useless for comparative purposes.
     Here is one example: The prop initially chosen for the RV-6 was a wooden two blade, 68" in diameter and
     with, by the manufacturers definition, 69" of pitch. It worked quite well, though it was a "cruise" rather than
     "performance" prop. With a 160 HP engine, it gave a static RPM of 2200 and a top speed RPM of 2850. At
     8,000 ft. cruise altitude, fu!l throttle (75%) yielded about 2775 RPM and 192 mph. It is our understanding that
     continuous operation of the Lycoming engines at high RPM is not a cause for concern other than for higher
     fuel consumption, noise, and engine wear. But, since 2775 RPM is a bit higher than the 2700 RPM
     recommended for maximum cruise, we throttled back about 1" bringing the RPM down to 2700 and the speed
     to 188 mph. As discussed earlier, cruising at less than fu!l throttle causes a slight loss of engine efficiency
     and inability to lean the engine quite as well. Additional prop pitch to hold the RPM down would also drop the
     static RPM and would effect the take-off distance and climb. Since the RV-6/6A is a general purpose
     sportplane, we consider the minor cruise penalty a reasonable trade-off.
     This same airplane was later converted to a fixed pitch metal prop, 70" in diameter, and having, according to
     the manufacturer, 79" of pitch. If the pitch numbers were taken at face value, the large increase should have
     made a very big change in the airplane's performance. Instead, take-off performance was only slightly less,
     and top speed slightly greater. Fuel consumption at normal cruise decreased a few percentage points.
     We later changed props yet again, going to the Hartzell Constant Speed metal prop. The performance
     realized from the CS prop was in keeping with the earlier discussion on CS prop performance. Would this
     increased performance be worth the extra cost to you?
     Keep in mind this example is for one airplane only. Any significant difference in drag or weight wi!l make a
     difference that would dictate a different optimum prop pitch. An RV not aerodynamically finished as we!l as
     the example might experience a speed loss corresponding to an inch or two of pitch. Restated, a higher drag
     RV would require a prop with less pitch to cruise at the same RPM as a more efficient airplane which goes
     faster at the same power output.

     MA TCHING THE ENGINE TO THE PROPEL L ER
     There are many different models of Lycoming engines. Some can run both constant-speed or fixed-pitch
     propellers, some can only run fixed-pitch props. If you are buying a used engine, be certain the engine is
     correctly set up to run the type of propeller you intend to install. Incorrect installation can result in damage to
     the engine or even an in-flight failure.
     Regardless of whether you are using a new or used engine, acquire, read and understand a copy of
     Lycoming Service Instruction No. 1435. This Service Instruction details the modification necessary to the
     engine when converting from constant-speed to fixed-pitch propellers or vice versa. These modifications
     include installing or removing an oil line from the governor, removing, replacing and/or piercing various plugs
     in the crankshaft, replacing crankshaft bushings and more.
     ALL new engines from Van's must be modified before installing ANY propeller. They are supplied with a

sect 11 r7 11/14/07                             11-10
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT

temporary front crankshaft plug (Lycoming p/n STD 1211) in place. This must be removed completely if a
constant-speed prop is installed. If the engine is to turn a fixed pitch prop, the plug must be removed, the
rear plug down inside the crankshaft pierced as detailed in Service Instruction 1435, and a new STD 1211
installed.

PROPEL L ER SUPPLIERS
Van's does not sell wood props. There are many wood prop manufacturers, especially of wood fixed pitch
propellers, and we cannot keep up with their moves and changes. Van's does not conduct a regular program
of propeller testing, so we cannot recommend one manufacturer over any other. We recommend checking
the ads in magazines such as Kitplanes or EAA's Sport Aviation for prop manufacturers . Call and discuss
your needs with them. Don't be afraid to ask for references.




sect 11r7 11/14/07                           11-11
     RV AIRCRAFT                                                                                           SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION

                                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                fa
                                 lbl^                                           a^                                                                                  ^
                                ,.,                                             c                                                                                   a
                                                                a            4 9                     r?'              E                 E
                                J^ L                                        ,c r-I Gc                ^                la^
                                 90                             do          41 q.I                                    M                 H
                                                            jd                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                                                                                    ^
                                 # ^P           v                                                   4
                                                                #           mr A^                   O                                  b
                                                                             ^ a                    C-              [ti                i--                          ^
                                i4A                                                                 ^               tu                 N
                                                mes
                                tti^           ^ C                           t^t1.c^i ^                             ^                                               ^
                                               -44          ^                $4 v w a                                                          ^
                                tir
                                                            ^                                                       ^
                                                                           v=E Q                                                                                    ,4
                                 a^dca          a           ^                                                                          ° ZE I;                      ^
                         .h
                                                                                                    4
                         F
                                .r,                                        ,-r ia }ti O                             W                          :3
                                                                                                                                       cW • .4 p
                                                           -E                                       ^               -I
                                 o. cq                                                                                                                              ra
                                                fe?                                                                                                                 a.
                                                                                                                                       ^4 ,.4 ^ -i
                      ^%
                                        C3     ..^o
                                                                             Qv w ^
                                                                                                    ^               ^                    4P
                      P^ "                                                                                                             ^.s
                                 sr',I         qj +P        19               a^                                                              i. ad b w.
                     N           4 d                                                                                                                                                               u
                                               -ah
                                                            $                                       21                                       2.5Laa
                                                           's!
                      UW         9 r.          --A                         w Fmi                                                       ^G,.^o m ci                                                 X
                                               4.a                                                                                     8 ^
                                                                            o
                     fi fl.vt    L". py        i''Lrl                                                                                  W n.[                        ^^ v                           ^
                           V)                    k P.       ..^                                     -I              ^                  aF v d ..s
                                                                                                    W               .r.^                                            4w
                      rC
                       dW                          G.       tkD              m+ti CI Gtl                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                    N               ri                     ri ema                        u^                        m
                                                            p                                       ^                                         O 4
                     pi^+^
                                               ^            u£
                                                                                                                                        ^M J MYda^                  Sh ^
                                                                                                                                                                       l1               0          a •
                                ^Ul                         Qad            r-i=t- d n                                                                                                              G[^t
                                ss                  ^
                                                    P-4                                                             f o++                                                               ^          m^e
                     O # ^              .a-                                                         a^ o^ as ^ry                                                                        U          4
                     1'S La ^
                                w                                             4-- m }Q                              i°7 s y °            er s a} Fr,_a               r
                                                            ^A              } d ^ Q F.^ L
                                                                                                                                       tm 0 Ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                   I+ z
                     P-i ^ r+                                               4d F. u                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                     _ g                 a
                                                                           jq                                                                      r^d6^                                ^
                                                           4.3 m                    PS G                            Mi4
                                                                     54                                                                                             %N^G^               r.^              w
                                                                             rab
                                                                            ao   r^
                                                                                ..a                                                    P54 P 0                                           m
                                                            0                                       dA m0           m^wdc,              fl o...                                         p
                                                                                                                    la+i sdwP-4        u ^wdea...^                                      a
                                                                                  ^9 ^^                  .w ^or[
                                                                                                                                                                          F-^ a                    Q^
                      11                                   ^-0                                                                         &ro e1 #w 0-4
                                aF^i                                                                                                                                                    ^          -K
                     €3 W                                                                           r• L re5                           ` 71 f,F `h ik                                                    Fd
                                                                            4 m
                                                                              +..r G
                                                                                   ^.}                              ^od5 w
                                                                                                                         q^ p^+i       ti5 ,^ Ff. FI 47                                 8}
                                                                     4                              m^Ya.^CrJ       131-1
                                                                                                                                                                    ig HHrrt            ^
                                                           .t              u,^•{c m r                                                        ^ 1 C I
                                        xcVJ               VF                                                                                                                           4          Q
                                                                                           ad-                                                                                          tq         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                Fi                                                                  tl              Mk
                                                                                                                                       ^                                                           6
                                D                                                                                                                                                       G
                                               P                          ^           x             4
                                                                                                                     C                 ^
                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                                                                  48
                                                                                                                                                                  x
                                                                                                                                                                                        I^L




                                                                                              ri
                                                                                              p
                                                                                               si
                                                                                               u
           ra                                                                                                                   V3
                                                                                               IA
                                                                                       M                                                                                                            i
           rY
                                                                                       ^ r.                          a r
                                                                                                                     rC4, a                               E                                         F,
                                                                                           L
                                                                                         • ar                         h rW                                                                          ^
                                                                                       4 YS u              e  n  ^ny        }                                                                       ^
                                                                                                           U. S. ryo.•[^8
                                                                                       I D 10                  Q    Q^' 21a                                                          d^i d •
                                                                                           J-D W                                                                                   F44- W+^
                                                                                                                                                          M                          4-1
                hy                                                                                       [ti .+.^j bfl.40^G
                                                                                       a+iN
                                                    F.                      vi                           N
           O S^] •i N c't                                                  v                                           ore•
                                                    k                                  r+ r eq
           x^                                       0                                                                                                     F4                      H ^ ^ +kb
                                                                                                         ^ ++am     w a ^ ^ 4 4.w J                                               rt-i w.r
                                                    L      r.                                            z a• W I.ai-i^ . m..y"
                                                    m      #               47 a.IJ.Q^ m
                                                                                                                                                                                  O a S. f,
                                                    ^       Y                     i1 a                   O b^ b cQ.ib w^K^^
                                                    0                      c^i .F.ArF-,n                                                                                          w1YfGO^
                                                           m $a                                                                                                                     ea*.e,
                                                                           0 n4 a^.a u                                                                    ^i ^                    mwo au
      N                                                                                                  ^ .y^ Os.^7w^4.s^d
                                                                                                                ^           5.C
                                                                               ^w G,ci
                                                                     rl                             4 4 u^ -d '.Grir a#^^5 C
                                                                                                                                                                                   Crr^ 6i
      •0 44d^ImIG113                                ^                                               +^I.W o Y  0    O   O                                 ^ V) U
                                                    ^         a
      RrY P. tO                                            ei q             ^^ V ^                                                                             G G
                                                                                                    ^4J GdO w ^Y..F.1
                                                                               ^ #.                                                  F4 11 0 1 17                                              0
      a                                            ^
                                                           A
                                                           .0              a^ pr+ 4                                                            04                                  ia.iw 1 H
                                                            td                                                                                            Q ^ M ^
                                                                                  -M 47 F. {#
                                                   ^       r-I 0           F,2,^wam                 K v a.- ^r°
                                                                                                              a K s a ui '^ 6 ^ c^a +9+ IC
                                                              ^                                                                                                                    Q 40 ^od f.
                                                                           od C'^Y^a                f+v D^ hk p 1. c a a, Cd ^ o
      4                                                      ,.a          FCp                                                                             ax^^^
                                                    u      4+0.            K Rvi -c ^ m F                                                                                                                14
          _
          .4
      "I ^4                                                                                         a Ic E^oY46a ed 4^.^ia^a^ tDG                         W
                                                    ^                                                                                                     ^.-I9 ^o o^j            ^ a ^ a
                                                                                                                xr^ OV u^^^7 C3 1 F.                                              ..y ^.^.^ r4 0
                                                    c7     U di                                     l7 y U-i od a6 k. S1 er.., 7H 5*I 91 ••i              G Q6$                       [a
                   &J fF                                                  K OG                                JG Oa U .y Lko'^ ('1 W 3
      v ia ^t4 a 6 ei k                                                                             r.i■ ..y aJ l4 .•im unF^O ^ }rs
                                                                 dk^                                  cd ^G.o^sC Gw^C d^ .0..-I G.
                                                           671                                      ^ ^^{-+ a S.w 2S e+^ ^.                               o-.e u,.y-,y
     4m ^^i^vN4'^^^ ^+e^
                                                          N [4
                                                                                                    ^WtkK^^oa ca^v^i,o
                                                                                                                                                               «ao
     {S w
                                                                                                    W. ^^dr4,r^ w ^^l ^^ir^id^•^ai                     6ip^o++t+i7
                                                                                                             -I- C-6 m ^ 4 --l .1" a p p Vp                         I L
                                                 M p                                                                                                                                          IA ^
                                                                                                             LY]^cn AV m:                                 ^    -C   IR
                                                 F W
                                                 fi E                                               m^         t3    Q      ^    .
                                                                                                                                                       !
                                96 ^I tr }r      u
                                                 ro       rO              {^_C7
                                ajg
                                         H-4
                                                          La                                                                                           ^
                                                          r51                                       ^a         v      a     e                          L14
                                                                                                                                                       f3                         L'S
      ;:b aOtiEa.C a ^ J r                       Q        44              r.}
                                                                                                    C
      r"' G H £-i G                              F4 Q                     +-^Y                      W                                                  C^
                                                                                                                                                       F-I
                                                                                                                                                                                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                  f-s




sect 11 r7 11/14/07                                                                   11-12
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT



                      A GUIDE TO LYCOMING FOUR CYLINDER PARALLEL VALVE ENGINES


                  Tlot          E       S/N
          Model liP RPM Fuel C.R. Description Suffi.Y

        0-235-N2A 116 2800 10011ooLL 8.10:1 Same as -L2A but lower comp. ratio and power -15

        0-235-N2C 116 2800 100110oLL 8.10:1 Same as -L2C but lower comp. ratio and power -115

        0-235-Pl 116 2800 loonooLL 8.10:1 Same as -Ml but lower comp. ratio and power -15

        0-235-P2A 116 2800 worlool.L 8.10:1 Similar to -P1 but has AS-127, Type 1 propeller lange -15

        0-235-P2C 116 2800 loowaLL 8.10:1 Same as -M2C but lower comp. ratio and powe: -15
        0-235-P3C 116 2800 100nooLL 8.10:1 Same as -M3C but lower comp. ratio and power -15

        0-290-D 130 2800 80 6.50:1 Solid tappets, hydro control -21

        0-290-11 127 2800 80 6.50:1 Same as 0-290-D -21

        0-290-D2 140 2800 80 7.50:1 Hydraulic tappets, 18° spark advance -21

        0-290-D2A 140 2800 80 7.50:1 Same as -D2 but new crankcase for controllabie prop. -21
        0-290-1)2B 140 2800 80 7.00:1 Same as -D2. 25° spark advance and lower C.R. -21

        0-290-D2C 140 2800 80 7.00:1 Same as -D2B with Retard Breaker Magnetos -21

        0-320-AlA 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Controilable propeller, 250 spark advance Bendi.i -27
                                           S4LN-20 and S4LN-21 Magnetos

         0-320-A1B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -AlA with straight riser in oil sump and -32 -27
                                            carburetor

         0-320-A2A 150 2700 80 700:1 Same as -AIA but fixed pitch propeller -27
         0-320 _A2B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -A2A with straight riser in oil sump ar.d -32 -27
                                             carburetor

         0-320-A2C 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as 1128 with Retard Breaker Magnetos -27

         0-320-A2D 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -E3D but with conical mounts and 0-320,a sump -27
                                               and intake pipes

         0-320-A3A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -AlA but uses 7116 in. dia. propeller boits -27

         0-320-A3B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -A3A except for straight riser in oil st'm and -27
                                             -32 carburetor
         0-320-A3C 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -A3B except for Retard Breaker 141agr.etos -27

         0-320-BIA 160 2700 1001100LL 8.50:1 Same as -AIA but high C.R. -39

         0-320-B1B 160 2700 loortooLL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A except for straight riser in oil si:..-ip and -39
                                                -32 carburetor

         0-320-B2A 160 2700 1001100LL 8.50:1 Same as -BIA fixed pitch propeller -39

         0-320-B2B 160 2700 1001IDOLL 8.50:1 Same as -B2A except for straight riser in oil sc.-np and -39
                                               -32 carburetor
         0-320-B2C 160 2700 toorlooLL 8.50:1 Same as -B2B except for Retard Breaker Mag_ etos -39

         0-320-B2D ^t 160 2700 1001300LL 8.50:1 Same as -D1D except fixed propeller and conica: mounts -39

         0-320-B3A 160 2700 uwnuotL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A except for 7/16 inch propeAer at:aching -39
                                              bolts




sect Ilr7 11/14/07                               11-13
     RV AIRCRAFT                                              SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION




                                                       PISTON - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES
                               'C/Ot           E     S/N
                        Model HP RPM Fuel C-R. Description Suffix

                       0-320-B3B 160 2700 Ioo.aooLL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A except for 7116 inch attaching bolts and -39
                                                              straight riser in oi1 sump and -32 carburetor

                       0-320-B3C 160 2700 100,'100LL 8.50:1 Same as -B3B except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -39

                       0-320-C1A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B1A -39

                       0-320-C1B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B1B -39

                       0-320-C2A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B2A -39
                       0-320-C2B 150 2700 80 7,00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B2B -39

                       0-320-C2C 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B2C -39

                       0-320-C3A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B3A -39

                       0-320-C3B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B3B -39

                       0-320-C3C 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Low compression field service conversion of -B3C -39
                       0-320-D1A 160 2700 I00700LL 8.50:1 Same as -B3B but with Type 1 dynafocal mounts -39

                       0-320-D1B 160 2700 loonOOLL 8.50:1 Same as -D1A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -39

                       0-320-D1C 160 2700 ]W 100LL 8.50:1 Same as -D2C but with provision for controllable prop. -39

                       0-320-DiD 160 2700 lVo1l00LL 8.50:1 Similar to -D1A but has horizontal carburetor and in- -39
                                                             duction housing and has SGck Magnetos

                       0-320-DIF 160 2700 100700LL 8.50:1 Same as -ElF except has high compression pistons -39
                       0-320-D2A 160 2700 1oo11ooLL 8.50:1 Same as -D1A but with fixed pitch propelier and 3/8 in. -39
                                                             attaching bolts

                       0-320-D2B 160 2700 100znoLL 8-501 Same as -D2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -39

                       0-320-D2C 160 2700 100100LL 8.50:1 Same as -D2A except for -1200 series Magnetos -39

                       0-320-D2F 160 2700 1oo'looLL 8.50:1 Same as -E2F except has high compression pistons -39

                       0-320-D2G 160 2700 10010oLL 8.50:1 Same as -D2A but with SGck Magnetos, 7/16 instead -39
                                                            of 3/8 in. propeller flange bolts
                       0-320-D2H 160 2700 l0U1OOLL 8.50:1 Same as -D2G but with 0-320-B surnp and intake pipes -39
                                                            and has provision for AC type fuel pump

                       0-320-D2J 160 2700 IoalooLL 8.50:1 Similar to -D2G but has (2) Slick impuise coupling -39
                                                            magnetos and an unmachined governor pad on front of
                                                                 crankcase

                       0-320-D3G 160 2700 10010ULL 8.50:1 Same as -D2G but with 3/8 in. propeller attaching bolts -39
                                                            and has provisions for fuel pump

                       0-320-E1A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -A3B but with Tgpe 1 dynafocal mounts -27

                       0-320-EIB 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -E1A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -27
                       0-320-E1C 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -E1A but has -1200 series Magnetos -27

                       0-320-E1F 150 2700 SO 7.00:1 Same as -EIC but with propeller governor drive on left -27
                                                           front of crankcase




sect I 1 r7 11/14/07                               11-14
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT




                                          PISTON - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                    T/Ot                                                                                           E S/N
         Model HP RPM               Fuel C.R. Description                                                          Suffix

       0-320-EI.I 150 2700           80 7.00:1 Same as -ElF but has SGck Magnetos                                  -27

       0-320-E2A       150/ 2700/    80 7.00:1 Same as -EIA but with fixed pitch propeller and uses                -27
                       140 2450                    3/8 inch attaching bolts and has aiternate rating of 140 HP
                                                   at 2450 RPM-

       0-320-E2B 150 2700            80 7.00:1 Same as -E2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos                     -27

       0-320-E2C 150/ 2700/          80 7.00:1 Same as -E2A but has -1200 series hiagnetos                         -27
                   140 2450

       0-320-E2D 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Similar to -E2A but with Slick Magnetos, 0-235 front -27
                                           main bearing and 7/16 inch propeller flange bushings
       0-320-E2F 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -ElF but with fixed pitch propeller -27

       0-320-E2G 150 2700 80 7.00:1                  Same as -E2D but has 0-320-A sump and intake pipes -27

       0-320-E2H 150 2700 80 7.00:1                  Same as -E2D but equipped with S4LN-20 and -21 Mags. -27

       0-320-E3D 150 2700 80 7.00:1                  Same as -E2D but uses 3/8 inch instead of 7l16 inch propeller -27
                                                     flange bushings

       0-320-E3H 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -E3D but equipped with S4LN-20 and -21 Mags. -27
       0-320-H1AD 160 2700 to01l0oLL 9.00:1 Integral accessory section crankcase, front mounted fuel -76
                                            pump, external mounted oil pump and D4RN-3000 impulse
                                            coupGng dual magneto

       0-320-HIBD 160 2700 100n0oLL 9.00:1 Same as -H1AD but with D4RN-3200 retard breaker dual -76
                                                magneto

        0-320-H2AD 160 2700 IoonOoLL 9-00:1 Same as -HIAD but with fixed pitch propeller -76

        0-320-H2BD 160 2700         I0ot100LL 9.00:1 Same as -H2AD but with D4RN-3200 retard breaker dual -76
                                                     magneto

        0-320-H3AD 160 2700 1001IOOLL 9.00:1         Same as -H2AD but uses 3/8 inch instead of 7/16 inch -76
                                                     prope➢er flange bushings
        0-320-I-I3BD 160 2700 100nooLL 9.00:1        Same as -H3AD but with D4RN-3200 retard breaker dual -76
                                                     magneto

        10-320-AlA 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as 0-320-E1B but with rear Bendix fuel injection and -55
                                               Type 2 dynafocal mounts

        10-320-A2A 150 2700 80 700:1 Same as AIA but with fixed pitch propeller and 3/8 inch -55
                                            propeller flange bushings

        10-320-B1A 160 2700 100f100LL 8.50:1 Same as 0-320-D1A but with Type 2 dynafocal mounts and -55
                                                rear mounted Bendix fuel injector

        I0-320-B1B 160 2700 100110OLL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A but has AN fuel pump drive -55
        10-320-B1C 160 2700 1001(IULL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A but has adapter for mounting fuel injector -55
                                               straight to the rear

        10-320-BID 160 2700 100110oLL 8.50:1 Same as -BIC but with -1200 series Retard Magnetos -55

        10-320-B1E 160 2700 100nooLL 8.50:1 Same as -D1C but with rear mounted horizontal fuel injector -55

        I0-320-B2A 160 2700 100nuoLL 8.50:1 Same as -81A but with fixed pitch propeller and 3/8 inch -55
                                               propeller flange bushings




sect Ilr7 11/14/07                                 11-15
     RV AIRCRAFT                                                SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION




                                                   PISTON - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                         TIOt          E      SIN
                  Model HP RPM Fuel C.R. Description Suffix

                10-320-C1A 160 2700          IoonoaLL 8.50:1 Same as -B1A except converted for use with turbocharger, -55
                                                              long reach spark plugs, piston cooGng oil jets, vented fuel
                                                              nozzles, two S4LN-21 impulse coupling magnetos and
                                                              AN fuel pump drive

                 I0-320-CIB 160 2700 IoonoOLL         8.50:1 Same as -CIA but with fuel injector mounted straight to the -55
                                                              rear and 24 volt system standard

                 I0-320-D1A 160 2700         toonooLL 8.50:1 Same as 0-320-D2C except has Bendix RSA-5AD1 -55
                                                              fuel injector, provision for controllable propeller and
                                                              7/16 inch propeller flange bushings

                 10-320-D1B 160 2700 106ROoLL         8.50:1 Same as -D1A but with propelfer governor drive on -55
                                                              left front of crankcase

                 I0-320-D1C      160 2700    100nooLL 8.50:1    Same as -D1B but with SGck Magnetos, 24 volt system and -55
                                                                100 amp altemator standard
                 I0-320-E1A 150 2700 80 7.00:1                  Same as 0-320-A3B except has Bendix fuel injector -55

                 IO-320-EIB 150 2700 80 700:1                   Same as -ElA but with Slick Magnetos -55

                 10-320-E2A 150      2700 80 7.00:1 Same as -EiA but with fixed pitch propeller and 3/8 inch -55
                                                          propeller flange bushings

                 10-320-E2B 150 2700           80 7.00:1 Same as 0-320-A2D but with Bendix RSA-SAD1 fuel -55
                                                           injector

                 IO-320-F1A 160 2700 toonooLL 8.50:1 Same as -CIA but with Type 1 dynafocal mounts -55
                 LIO-320-B1A 160 2700 looaOnLL 8.50:1           Similar to IO-320-B1A but has left hand rotation -66
                                                                crankshaft

                 LIO-320-C1A 160 2700 10070ULL         8.50:1   Similar to I0-320-CLA but has left hand rotation -66
                                                                crankshaft

                 AI0-320-ALA 160 2700 1W 1DOLL 8.70:1 Aerobatic engine with performance similar to I0-320-D1A -65

                 AIO-320-A1B 160 2700 l001aiLL 8.50:1 Same as -AlA but has impulse coupling Magneto -65

                 AIO-320-A2A 160 2700 loo'looLL 8.50:1 Same as -AlA but with fixed pitch propeller -65
                 /1I0-320-J12B 160 2700 100'1110LL 8.50:1       Same as -A2A but has impulse coupling Magneto -65

                 AIO-320-BIB 160 2700 100 looLL 8.50:1 Similar to -91B but with front mounted fuel injector -65

                 AJO-320-CIB 160 2700 1001ooLL 8.50:1 Similar to -B1B but the fuel injector is vertically mounted -65
                                                         on the bottom of the sump

                 :1EIO-320-D1B 160 2700 lUU'IOOLL 8.50:1 Same as I0-320-D1B but is equipped with Aerobatic kit -55

                 AEIO-320-D2B 160 2700 100'10OLL       8.50:1 Same as -D1B but with fixed pitch propeller -55
                 AEIO-320-EIA 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as 10-320-E1A but is equipped with Aerobatic kit -55

                 :1EIO-320-E1B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as I0-324-E1B but is equipped with Aerobatic kit -55

                 AEIO-320-E2A 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as IO-320-E2A but is equipped with Aerobatic kit -55

                 i1E10-320-E2B 150 2700 80 7.00:1 Same as I0-320-E2B but is equipped crith Aerobatic kit -55

                 0-330-A1A 170 2700 100'100LL 8.50:1 Controllable propeller -30
                 0-340-A1B 170 2700 1oo'10ULL 8.50:1 Same as :41A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -30




sect I 1 r7 11/14/07                              11-16
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT




                                        PISTON - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                        T/Ot                                                                                  E S/N
        Model        HP RPM       Fuel C.R. Description                                                       Sufflx

      0-340 _A2A      170 2700   looaootL 8.50:1 Same as -AlA but fixed pitch propeller                       -30

      0-340-B1A       160 2700     80 7.15:1 Low compression -AlA                                             -30

      0-340-82A       160 2700     80 7.15:1 Low compression -A2A                                             -30

      0-360-AlA       180 2700    loaluuLL 8.50:1 Dynafocal mounts                                            -36

      0-360:91AD 180 2700 100700LL 8.50:1 Same as -AlA but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupiing dual               -36

      0-360 _AIC 180 2700 100 looLL 8.50:1        Similar to -AIA but has horizontal induction housing, -36
                                                  Bendix PSH-5BD pressure carburetor and retard breaker
                                                  magnetos

      0-360-r11D 180 2700 loo.uwLL         8.50:1 Same as -AlA except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36

      0-360:A1F 180 2700 100100LL 8.50:1          Same as -AIA with -1200 series Magnetos -36

      0-360 _A1F6 180 2700 100a0oLL 8.50:1        Same as -AIF but has (1) sixth and (1) eighth order -36
                                                  counterweights

      0-360.A1F6D 180 2700 taulooLL        8.50:1 Same as -AIF6 but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling dual -36
                                                   magnetos
      0-360:X1G 180 2700 100, 100LL        8.50:1 Similar to -A1F but has horizontal carburetor and induction -36
                                                  housing

      0-360-A1G6 180 2700 100r10oLL 8.50:1 Same as -A1G but has (1) sixth and (1) eighth order -36
                                            counterweights

      0-360-A1G6D 180 2700 lon.IWLL 8.50:1 Same as -AIG6 but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling -36
                                             dual magneto

      0-360 .aIH 180 2700 tco luoLL 8.50:1 Same as -A1G but with propeller governor drive on left -36
                                              front of crankcase and -21, -204 magnetos

      0-360 _A1H6 180 2700 100?100LL 8.50:1 Same as -A1H but has (1) sixth and (1) eighth order -36
                                            countenveights
      0-360-A1LD 180 2700 loolWLL 8.50:1 Similar to -A1A but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling -36
                                            dual magneto and has propeller governor drive on left
                                            front of crankcase

      0-360-A1P * 180 2700 100i100LL 8.50:1 Same as -(;IG except dynafocal mounts -36

      0-360-A2A 180 2700 100+100LL 8.50:1 Same as -AIA but fixed pitch propeller -36

      0-360-A2D 180 2700 loalooLL 8.50:1 Same as -A2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36

      0-360 .42E 180 2700 1I)0:7UULL 8.50:1 Same as -A2D with provision for AN fuel pump drive -36
      0-360-A2F 180 2700 100110OLL 8.50:1 Same as -A2A with -1200 series Magnetos -36

      0-360-A2G 180 2700 1W 100LL 8.50:1 Same as -AIG but fixed pitch propeller -36

       0-360-A2H 180 2700 100/lU9LL 8.50:1 Same as -AIH but has fixed pitch propeller -36

       0-360-A3A 180 2700 loortoaLL 8.50:1 Same as -A2A but has 6 special long bushings in -36
                                            propeller flange

       0-360-A3AD 180 2700 1Wl1OOLL 8.50:1 Same as -A3A but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling dual -36
                                              magneto




sect Ilr7 11/14/07                                11-17
     RV AIRCRAFT                                                  SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION




                                                          PISTQN - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                              T/Ot           E     S/N
                       Model HP RPM Fuel C.R. Description Suffix

                  0-360-A3D 180 2700 toonooLL 8.50:1 Same as -A3A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36

                  0-360-A4A 180 2700 toonaoLL 8.50:1 Same as -A3A but has solid crankshaft -36

                  0-360-A4AD 180 2700 IoonaaLL 8.50:1 Same as -A4A but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling dual -36
                                                         magneto

                  0-360-A4D 180 2700 toonooLL 8.50:1 Similar to -A4A except with Retard Breaker Magnetos, {2}
                                                              magneto drive isolators and -A2A propeIler Flange Bushings -36

                  0-360-A4G 180 2700 IoanooLL 8.50:1 Same as -A2G but has -A4A crankshaft with -A2G propeller -36
                                                          flange bushings
                  0-360-A4) 180 2700 t00lIWLL 8.50:1 Same as -A4G but has -21 and -204 Magnetos -36

                  0-360-A4K 180 2700 I0Qi1D0LL 8.50:1 Same as -A4J but with Slick Magnetos -36

                  0-360 A4M 180 2700 Ioo,+1DoLL 8.50:1 Same as -A4A but with Slick Magnetos -36

                  0-360-A4N 180 2700 toonOoLL 8.50:1 Same as -A4M but has an ulunachined governor pad on -36
                                                        front of crankcase and -A2G propeller flange bushings

                  0-360-A4P * 180 2700 100nooLL 8.50:1 Same as -A4M except for propeller flange bushings -36
                  0-360-A5AD 180 2700 loonUOtL 8.50:1 Same as -A4AD but has standard lengtb propeller flange -36
                                                         bushings

                  0-360-B1A 168 2700 80 7.20:1 Same as :AlA but low compression ratio -36

                  0-360-BIB 168 2700 80 7.20:1 Same as -B1A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36

                  0-360-B2A 168 2700 80 7.20:1 Same as -B1A except for fixed pitch propeller -36

                  0-360-B2B 168 2700 80 7.20:1 Same as -B2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36
                  0-360-B2C * 168 2700 80 7.20:1 Same as -B2A except has 10-360-A crank and rods -36

                  0-360-C1A 180 2700 wo:iuuLL 8.50:1 Same as AIA but conical rubber mounts -36

                  0-360-C1C 180 2700 100106LL 8-50:1 Same as -CIA except for Retard Breaker Magnetos -36

                  0-360-CIE 180 2700 looIOOLL 8.50:1 Same as -C1A but with Slick Magnetos -36

                  0-360-CIF 180 2700 tootooLL 8.50:1 Same as -A1G with conical mounts and S1ick magnetos -36
                  0-360-C1G 180 2700 toa looLL 8.50:1 Same as -CLA but with propeIler governor drive on left front -36
                                                            of crankcase

                  0-360-C2A        180 2700 10o loaLt       8.50:1 Same as -CIA but fixed pitch propeller                  -36

                  0-360-C2B        180 2700 100 looLL       8.50:1 Same as -CL9 but fixed pitch propeller and horizontal   -36
                                                                    pressure carburetor and has helicopter rating

                  0-360-C2C        180 2700 uw-muLL         8.50:1 Same as -C2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos         -36

                  0-360-C2D        180 2700 100 10OLL       8.50:1 Same as -C2B except for Retard Breaker A4agnetos        -36
                  0-360-C2E        180 2700 1001001.1.      8.50:1 Same as -C2A but with SUck Magnetos                     -36

                  0-360-C4F * 180 2700 l001ooLL             8.50:1 Same as -C1F except has solid crankshaft and no         -36
                                                                    provision for propeller governor

                  0-360-C4P * 180 2700          wolooLL     8.50:1 Same as -A4M except for propeller flange bushings and   -36
                                                                    conical mounts




sect I 1 r7 11/14/07                                11-18
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT




                                       PISTON - (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                  T/Ot                                                                                           E S!N
       Model HP RPhI             Fuel       C.R.      Description                                                Suffix

      0-360-DIA 168 2700          80 7.20:1 Same as -B1A but conical rubber mounts and -1200 series              -36
                                                magnetos

      0-360-D2A 168 2700          80 7.20:1 Same as -B2A but conical rubber mounts                               -36

      0-360-D2B 168 2700          80 7.20:1 Same as -D2A except for Retard Breaker Magnetos                      -36

      0-360-EL96D 180 2700      100nooLL 9.00:1 Integral accessory section crankcase, front mounted              -77
                                                  fuel pump, externaI oil pump, D4RN-3000 impulse
                                                  coupling dual magnetos and counterweighted crankshaft

      0-360-F1A6 180 2700       1001flnoLL 8.50:1 Similar to 0-360-A series with new sump for nose wheel         -36
                                                 clearance, rear HA-6 carburetor, has (1) sixth and (1) eighth
                                                 order counterweights and has propeller governor drive on
                                                 left front of crankcase
      0-360-G1A6 180 2700       1001100LL 8.50:1 Same as -FIA6 but with a machined pad on right front            -36
                                                of crankcase

      HO-360-A1A 180 2700       wonOOLL 8.50:1 Same as 0-360-A21) but with MA-4-5AA carburetor                   -36
                                                and type 2 dynafocal mounts

      HO-360-B1A 180 2900       100i100LL 8.50:1 Same as 0-360-C2D except for rated speed                        -36

      HO-360-B1B 180 2900       1001400LL 8.50:1 Same as -BIA but with two (2) S4LN-200 LIagnetos                •36

      I0-360-A1A 200 2700       100r100LL 8.70:1 Bendix fuel injection, tuned induction                          -51
      10-360-A1B 200 2700       100+10oLL 8.70:1 Same as -AIA but has -1200 series impulse coupling              -51
                                                 magnetos

      IO-360-A1B6 200 2700      1001100LL 8.70:1 Same as -AIB but has (1) sixth and (1) eighth order             -51
                                                 countertiveights

      IO-360-AIB6D 200 2700     100;m011 8_70:1 Same as -A1B6 but has (1) Bendix D4LN-3000 impulse               -51
                                                 coupling dual Magneto

      IO-360-A1C 200 2700       100:106LL 8.70:1 Same as -AlA but with -1200 series Magnetos                     -51

      IO-360-A1D 200 2700       1001100LL 8.70:1 Same as -A1B but has S4LN-21 impulse coupling and               -51
                                                 S4LN-204 Magnetos
      IO-360-a1D6 200 2700      wOr1o0LL 8.70:1 Same as -A1B6 but with propeller governor drive on left          -51
                                                front of crankcase

      IO-360-A1D6D 200 2700     100?100LL S.70:1 Same as -AID6 but has (1) Bendix D4LN-3000 impulse              -51
                                                 coupling dual magneto

      IO-360-A2A     200 2700   100!10oLL 8.70:1 Same as AlA but fixed pitch propeller                           -51

      IO-360-A2B     200 2700   loonooLL 8.70:1 Same as -A2A but has -1200 series impulse Magnetos               -51

      IO-360-A2C     200 2700   1001100LL 8.70:1 Same as -A1C but has fixed pitch propeller                      -51
                     200 2700   100110otL 8.70:1 Same as -A1B6 with propeller flange bushings rotated 1200       -51
                                                  clockwise

      I0-360-A3B6D 200 2700     10o40oLL 8,70:1 Same as -A1B6D but with propeller locating bushings rotated      -51
                                                 1201 clockwise

      IO-360-A3D6D 200 2700     100n0oLL 8.70:1 Same as -A1D6D but with propeller locating bushings rotated      -51
                                                 120° clockwi9e




sect Ilr7 11/14/07                                11-19
     RV AIRCRAFT                                               SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION




                                                   PISTON • (4) FOUR CYLINDER SERIES

                         T/Ot           E      SIN
                  Model EIP RPM Fuel C.R. Description Suffix

                I0-360-B1A 180 2700 1DUMOLL 8-50_1 Same as 0-360-AID except for Simmonds 530 Fuel Injection -51
                                                      System

                I0-360-B1B 180 2700 100,700LL 8.50:1 Same as -BIA except for Bendix Fuel Injection System -51

                I0-360-B1C 177 2700 100?IOOLt. 8.50:1 Conversion of 0-360-AIC to Bendix Fuel Injection -51

                10-360-BiD 180 2700 100:100LL 8.50:1 Same as -B1B but with AN fuel pump drive -51

                10-360-B1E 180 2700 l001OpLL 8.50:1 Similar to -B1B with rear mounted fuel injection and -1200 -51
                                                         series impulse coupling magnetos
                I0-360-B1F 180 2700 !oa'IOULL 8.50:1 Similar to -B1B except has (2) -1227 Magnetos -51

                I0-360-B1F6 190 2700 lU0700LL 8.50:1 Same as -B1F but with one (I) sixth and (1) eighth -51
                                                      order counterweights

                10-360-B2E 180 2700 100100LL 8.50:1 Same as -BIE but has fixed pitch propeller -51

                I0-360-B2F 180 2700 100I100LL 8.50:1 Same as -BIF but fixed pitch propeller -51

                I0-360-B2F6 180 2700 100 IOOLL 8.50:1 Same as -B2F but with one (1) sixth and one (1) eighth -51
                                                        order counterweights
                Iv-30u-E41% Li}u Ltuu       ]OOIOOLL ts.5u:1 almllar to -t5its but has 54LN-21 (impulse coupling) and      -51
                                                            S4LN-20 magnetos and 0-360-A4A solid cranYtshaft

                10-360-C1A 200 2700         i(N) ioOLL 8.70:1 Same as AlA but with rear air inlet                          -51

                I0-360-C1B 200 2700         1001o0LL 8.70:1 Same as -C1A but with -1200 series Nlagnetos                   -51

                IO-360-C1C 200 2700         xo looLL 8.70:1 Similar to -C1B but has 14° injector adapter and impulse       -51
                                                              Magneto

                I0-360-C1C6 200 2700        1001DOLL 8.70:1 Same as -C1C but with one (1) sixth and one (1) eighth         -51
                                                            order counterweights
                I0-360-C1D6 200 2700        Uw 1iNILL 8.70:1 Similar to -C1C but has straight injector inlet and has (1)   -51
                                                             sixth and (1) eighth order countenveights

                I0-360-C1E6 200 2700        100 loaLL 8.70:1 Similar to -C1C but has propeller governor drive on left      -51
                                                              front of crankcase, has (1) sLxth and (1) eighth order
                                                              countenveights

                10-360-C1E6D 200 2700       IPOIWLL 8.70:1 Same as -C1E6 but with D4LN-3000 impulse coupling dual          -51
                                                            NIagrleto

                I0-360-C1F 200 2700         100IODLL 8.70:1 Same as -C1C but with AN fuel pump drive and pump              -51

                 10-360-D1A 200 2700        100 IooLL 8.70:1 Same as -CIB but has T^-pe 2 dynafocal mounts                 -51
                I0-360-EIA 180 2700         IOp 100LL 850:1 Similar to.-B1E but has Type 2 dynafocal mounts and            -51
                                                             Retard Breaker Magnetos

                 IO-360-F1A 180 2700        1L^D IDOLL 8,50:1 Sinvlar to -B1E except converted for use with Turbocharger   -51

                 IO-360-J1AD 200 2700       100 uxuL 8.70:1 Similar to _A1B except equipped icith a D4LN-3000              -51
                                                              dual magneto and has a rear type engine
                                                              mount similar to "I0-360-F1.a6D

                 IO-360-J1A6D 200 2700      1U01UULL 8.70:1 Same as J1AD but with (1) sixth and (1) eighth                 -51
                                                           order counterweights




sect I 1 r7 11/14/07                             11-20
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT




                                 Lycoming
             Reciprocating Engine Division/
                                                                              SERVI CE
             Subsidiary of Textron Inc.
             652 Oliver Street
             Williamsport, PA 17701 U.S.A.
                                                                           INSTRUCTION
              DATE:                                    April 25, 1986                                 Service Instruction No. 1435
                                                                                                         Engineering Aspects are
                                                                                                                   FAA Approved



             SUBJECT:                                  PART I:      Conversion from Constant Speed to Fixed Pitch Propeller
                                                                    and Vice Versa
                                                       PART II: Propeller Governor Oil Line Nut and Elbow

             MODELS AFFECTED: Avco Lycoming Direct Drive Engines

             TIME OF COMPLIANCE: At next overhaul or earlier at owner's discretion.


                                                          PART I: CONVERSION

                A change from constant speed to fixed pitch and            be converted to constant speed models because the
             vice versa dictates a change in model designation.            inside front of the crankshaft has not been machin-
             Replacement nameplates are only issued if the                 ed. Also, those models with a 4-piece split front
             original nameplate is lost. Refer to the latest edition       main bearing andlor no oil transfer tube cannot be
             of Service Instruction No. 1304. Engines may be               converted.
             changed from constant speed to fixed pitch installa-
             tions or vice versa if the serial number on the                  When changing from a constant speed to a fixed
             nameplate is stamped with a letter "C" to denote a            pitch propeller, it is necessary to pierce a 1/8" to
             model conversion and a copy of FAA Form 337                   3/16" hole in (or remove) the plug behind the oil
             listing all parts used with part numbers included,            return tube, and install an expansion plug in the
             and a description of the conversion or alteration are         front of the crankshaft. See Figure 1. As in Figure 2,
             accomplished. Also, the proper logbook entry                  if the crankshaft incorporates a 1/8" 1102 pipe plug,
             should be made. In some cases, conversion does re-            it must be removed when making this conversion.
             quire changing propeller flange bushings. Refer the
             latest edition of Service Instruction No. 1098 for ap-          REAR MOUNTED PROPELLER GOVERNOR
             propriate bushing part numbers.
                                                                             When changing from a fixed pitch to a constant
                                                                           speed propeller, it is necessary to remove the expan-
             FRONT MOUNTED PROPELLER GOVERNOR                              sion plug in the front of the crankshaft, and install a
                                                                           plug behind the oil return tube. See Figure 1. A pro-
               When changing from a fixed pitch to a constant              peller governor, adapter, oil line and fittings must
             speed propeller, it is necessary to remove the expan-         be installed. See Parts Data for application. Some
             sion plug from the front of the crankshaft, and in-           crankshafts for fixed pitch propellers cannot be con-
             stall a plug behind the oil return tube. See Figure 1.        verted to constant speed models because the inside
             Some crankshafts for fixed pitch propellers cannot            front of the crankshaft has not been machined.




                          This copy of Lycoming Service Instruction 1435 is provided for conceptual purposes
                           only. Before installing a propeller, obtain a current copy from Textron Lyconiing.




sect Ilr7 11/14/07                                     11-21
     RV AIRCRAFT                                                 SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION




                                                                                         Service Instruction No. 1435


          When changing from a constant speed to a fixed           longer required and should be removed, Install the
        pitch propeller with crankshafts as shown in Figure        proper plugs in the accessory housing and crankcase
        1, it is necessary to remove or pierce a 1/8" to           after removal.
        3116" hole in the plug behind the oil return tuhe, and
        install an expansion plug in the front of the                                  CAUTION
        crankshaft. If the crankshaft incorporates a 1/8"
        1102 pipe plug as shown in Figure 2, it must be               WHEN PIERCING THE PLUG BEHIND
        removed when making this conversioin. The pro-                THE OIL RETURN TUBE, BE CARE-
        peller governor, adapter, oil line and fittings are no        FUL NOT TO DAMAGE THIS TUBE.


                             REMOVE EXPANSION PLUG FOR
                             CONSTANT SPEED OPERATION.




                                                                      INSTALLED FOR CONSTANT SPEED
                                                                      OPERATION ONLY-PIERCE OR RE-
                                                                      MOVE FOR FIXED PITCH.

                                    Figure 1. Plug Installations for Propeller Conversion


                                                          IF THIS PLUG IS DAMAGED,
                                                          CRANKSHAFT MUST BE RE-
                                                          TURNED TO FACTORY FOR REPAIR.



            STD-121 1




                                                                               1102 PIPE PLUG
                                                               REMOVE FOR
                                                    FIXED PITCH PROPELLER OPERATION


                                        Figure 2. 1/8" Plug for Propeller Conversion




sect I1 r7 11/14/07                                 11-22
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT



                                                                                Service Instruction No. 1435


                     PART II: PROPELLER GOVERNOR OIL LINE NUT AND ELBOW

     As a product improvement, the propeller governor    ways to identify which nut you have; (1) aluminum
   oil line now comes equipped with a steel connecting   nuts are anodized making them blue in color or (2)
   nut P/N AN818-6. This nut is a component of the       the use of a magnet to determine aluminum from
   tube assembly and has been changed from               steel. Also, the aluminum elbow at the front of the
   aluminum to steel without changing the tube           crankcase has been replaced by a steel elbow P/N
   assembly part number. Therefore, there are two        MS20822-6. See Figure 3 and Parts Data.




                                                                                    MS20822-6

                                                                                                  18-6
                                                                                                  _ NUT




                          Figure 3. Propeller Governor Oil Line Nut and Elbow




sect 11r7 11/14/07                            11-23
     RV AIRCRAFT                                                               SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION



                                                                         Typl c a ^ Fuel/Dil
                                               , 2ea AN822-BD

                                          ^ F AE7D1-8*
                                                2EA F B16-BD
                             DII Cooler

                                          7AN816 Engin e oil cooler


                                                 -BD
                                                    ports.                Hose Ro±ng
                                                                                                     ALL hose Lengths dependent on routing.
                                                                                                     ALL suggested fittings nre typicaL but
                                                                                                           nay vary from instnllntion to
                                                                                                           InstalLatlon.
                                                                                                     Fuel pressure, oll pressure ond nanlFold
                                                                    AN823-BD                               pressure fittings in engine should
                                                                                                           have flow restrictors instalLed.


                                                                                       ®   \

                                                                                           ANB16-4
                                                                         OptlonaL
                                                                         Primer
                                                                                         F AE701-4' F AE701-4
                                                                                         2ea F 816-4    2ea F 816-4

                                                                                                   II             II

                                 7AE701:-4             ^             GnscoLntor
          AN816-4D9                      6-4     \                                      AN816-4D                      ANB16-4D
          AN91 0-1D            /              F AE7D1-6a'l                              AN910-1D                 414910-0
                    ^t        2ea F          816-6D
                    FuN                                                                         ^j
                  Pressu                                                                       Press
                                                                                               6AGA                9       B      I
                    nsd+ r
                                                       rlr11 I


                  AN832-4D FIREWALL
                  AN924-4D                             ®         AN924-6D           AN924-4D            AN924-4D




                                                            A`35X3/8            /
              F AE701-4                                     2en AN818-6D F AE701-4                                           ^-F AE701-4
              2en F 816-4                                   2ea AN819-6D 2ea F 816-4 60                                         2en F 816-4

                   AN816-4D                                                                                   AN816-4D AN816-4D
                                Fuel                                                                    a riPot
                               Prem                                                                    Press ^n+
                               Gaupe                   P^P                 Goupe                      Guupe




                                                                                                                           1/98 FwFhoses.dwg



                                      TYPICAL ENGINE PLUMBING DIAGRAM
     This should be taken as a guide only as it is likely your airplane will vary.

                                                                                           Control Arm WASHER 5702-75-60

                                                                                    AN960-10 Washer                            AN970-3 Washer
                                                                         MS24665-153 Cotter pin
                                                                                                                              AN3-11 OR 12 Bolt



                                                                               AN310-3 Castlenut

                                                                                                                          Rodenol Bearing
                                                                                    AN960-10L Washer



              A                                   B
             TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF A CONTROL CABLE TO THE MIXURE OR THROTTLE ARM
 The rodend bearing (at the engine end of the throttle and mixture cables) and control arm (on the carburetor) are connected by an
 AN bolt, sized as necessary, (an AN3 is shown in the example above) with a hole for the cotter pin. On each side of the rodend is a
 small spacer washer (WASHER 5702-75-60) which holds the rodend away from the washer aad the control arm, and allows the
 bearing to move freely at various angles without binding. Examples A and B show a situation where the rodend bearing housing
 has worn and slipped off the ball and bolt. This is prevented by installing the AN970-3 capture washer. The AN960-10 and
 AN960- I OL washers are used as needed to position the nut for the cotter pin. The AN310-3 castle nut should be torqued to 20-25
 in-lbs. The MS24665-153 cotter pin restrains the nut from backina off. NOTE: the hole in the ttaixture arm is typicall,v 1/4" and
 will rteed a bushing to fit an AN3 bolt.                        ^


sect I 1 r7 11/14/07                                             11-24
SECTION 11: ENGINE AND PROPELLER INSTALLATION RV AIRCRAFT



                                NOTES




sect 11r7 11/14/07      11-25
