 SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES




SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER
         & COOLING BAFFLES
 We believe the RV cowls to be an attractive and efficient design. Its smooth contours streamline the engine for low
 drag, and, in addition, it has been designed internally to reduce engine cooling drag; something often overlooked in
 homebuilts. It is light and mounts with no external fasteners to cause drag or detract from appearance. The cowls
 are designed to fit nearly all versions of the Lycoming O-320 and 0-360 engines and 200 HP I0-360 engines with
 forward injectors. Either fixed-pitch and Hartzell Compact Hub model constant-speed propellers may be installed.
 The cowl is supplied in five separate fiberglass pieces; the top half, lower half, a pair of upper inlet ducts, and an oil
 filler door. The lower cowl half includes an air intake scoop appropriate to the engine. Installing the cowl requires
 attaching the two cowl halves to each other and to the firewall. The inlet duct moldings must be bonded in place
 and an oil access door cut out and mounted. These points and more will be covered later, but first, let's review
 some engine cooling theory so that we can better understand why these installation procedures need to be
 followed.
 All engines recommended for use in the RVs were designed for pressure cooling. The pressure is supplied by the
 velocity of the aircraft moving through the air, but it is probably easier to understand if we assume the engine to be
 stationary and the air is moving past it. In Fig. 12-1 we try to show just what pressure cooling consists of. It is
 much more involved than just letting “wind'' in through a hole in the front of the cowl to “blow'' on the engine. As the
 drawing shows, the incoming air, because of the forward velocity of the aircraft, forms a high pressure parcel of air
 on the upstream or “cold air plenum'' side of the engine. A properly designed air outlet tends to act as a vacuum
 pump and cause the air in the downstream or “warm air plenum'' area to have a lower air pressure than that
 upstream. It is this pressure differential which causes the air to flow past the cooling fins of the engine and carry
 away the excess heat. Cooling baffles are required on the engine to direct the air past the cylinder cooling fins, and
 to serve as a barrier between the “intake'' and “outlet'' air plenum chambers. The air inlet and outlet openings
 should be carefully designed and constructed to maximize the pressure differential between the two portions of the
 cooling system.
 Aircraft engines are designed to require a certain volume of air per minute to operate within temperature limits. This
 is about 2500 cubic feet of air per minute for the O-320 and O-360 engines. From this we have determined the area
 required for the inlets to provide this volume of air at a full throttle climb speed of 90-100 mph; the flight mode which
 will impose the greatest cooling requirements. Then for higher speeds and/or lower power settings, cooling will be
 assured.
 There are three basic components we must consider in designing an efficient cooling system: inlet, baffling, and
 outlet. In the inlet we seek to pass air into the engine compartment with the minimum pressure loss and the
 minimum internal and external drag. With the baffles we attempt to direct the air over the cooling fins of the
 cylinders as evenly as possible and with a minimum of “waste” or loss through holes, gaps, or other unnecessary
 openings. The outlet is designed to cause the heated air to exit at a speed as near to slipstream velocity as is
 possible.
 Fig. 12-1 shows that the area of the inlets is much less than the cross section area of the cold air plenum inside the
 cowl. This means that the air must decelerate as it enters the engine compartment. As it slows down, its energy of
 motion is converted into pressure. The purpose of the contoured inlet ducts is to maintain a smooth flow during
 deceleration and thus maximize the pressure recovery. According to theory, a sharp edge inlet would cause a
 disturbed airflow resulting in energy being lost in conversion to heat rather than pressure. It is very important that
 the engine baffle is properly designed and fitted so that the only openings for this air to escape are those past the
 cylinder cooling fins. This means the area around the front of the engine must be baffled as well, to prevent air
 escaping forward around the starter ring gear.
 Fig. 12-1 shows a typical cowl and engine compartment. Fig. 12-2 shows the same cowl with improved contours on
 the inlets and outlets which make a significant difference in engine cooling and cooling drag. These consist mainly
 of inlet and outlet ducts with improved contours for smoother air flow. Also important, but not shown here, is a
 portion of the baffle near the front of the engine which blocks the cooling air from flowing forward over the front
 center of the engine and starter ring gear, and then out the bottom. This would be “wasted” air and cannot be
 tolerated in an efficient cooling system.
 The object of a pressure cowl baffle is to maximize the air pressure differential between incoming and outgoing air,
 and to provide the tightest possible seal between these two air chambers. Air entering the cowl openings which


12 11/29/12
                                                         12-1
                                            SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES


does not pass over the
cylinder cooling fins, or
serve some other
accessory           cooling
function, is wasted.
“Wasted air” will cause
either            engine
overheating because
there is not enough air
remaining to provide
cooling, or the need for
larger inlets and outlets
to       provide       the
necessary cooling air
plus the wasted air.
This means more drag
and less speed. While
it is difficult to completely seal an engine baffle, the combined area of these “waste air” leaks should be held to not
over 1 or 2 square inches.
Further improvements of the baffle are possible. Since the fit of the aluminum baffle to the engine will not be air-
tight, high temp. RTV Silicone Rubber can be used to seal these small gaps. The fabric airseal material used as a
seal between the baffle and cowl, often “puckers” away from the aluminum and permits air to escape. This may be
sealed with RTV as well.

AIR FILTER SYSTEMS
The RVs are designed to accept Lycoming engines from 115-200 horsepower. These engines may be fitted with a
wide range of induction devices including carburetors, fuel injection systems by different manufacturers, throttle
body injectors like those made by Ellison, and more. Just to make it more complicated, these devices may be
mounted in a variety of places on the engine. The cowls supplied with kit for 115-180 hp engines have an induction
scoop molded onto the bottom. This scoop is designed to fit the “standard” carburetor location on the bottom of the
sump (as used on new engines ordered through Van’s.)
Filtered air induction systems for the various engines and induction devices are offered in Van’s Accessories
Catalog and used by a vast majority of RV builders. These systems improve induction efficiency, filter all the air
entering the engine and include provisions for alternate air or carb heat. Installation instructions are included.
The cowl supplied for the 200 hp IO-360 angle valve engine has no scoop. Instead, it is designed to work with the
Horizontal Induction filtered air induction system in Van’s Accessories Catalog. Air is inducted through a filter
mounted in the left “nostril” of the cowl and routed through a molded fiberglass duct to the forward-facing injection
servo on the sump. In this case the engine cooling baffles should be fitted before the induction system.

BEFORE FITTING THE COWL
The following instructions are meant to cover all RV models. Some may not apply to your particular RV.
Before attempting to install the cowl, the engine (without the exhaust system installed) must be mounted. Check to
see that the engine mount bolts are tight, the rubber mounts are properly seated, and anything else which might
effect engine positioning or alignment is resolved. Some builders run the engine for a few minutes to “shake”
everything into place. We do not recommend this: Engines are designed to run with baffles and cowls in place and
will not cool properly without them. We have also received reports that running the engine on partial airframes
(without wings, etc., installed) has caused vibration damage to the airframe itself.
If you have chosen a fixed pitch prop, install the propeller extension on the front of the crankshaft. (NOTE: All RV
cowls are designed to use a 2 ¼” propeller extension or a constant-speed prop with an equivalent hub. See Section
11 and DWG C4). Install the spinner or at least the spinner back plate to use as a reference for positioning the front
of the cowl. If you are installing a constant-speed propeller, it is best if the prop is installed, because, in this case,
the spinner back plate mounts to the prop. If the prop is not available, a spacer 2 1/4” thick, attached to the front of
the crankshaft (be sure the starter ring gear is installed!) may be used to simulate it.

INSTALLING THE HINGES
The RV cowls use piano hinges as attachment fasteners. This offers several advantages: evenly distributed loads
along the attachment line, smooth cowl lines with no external fasteners, and easy installation and removal.

12 11/29/12
                                                       12-2
 SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES


 Several hinge segments are used for both attaching the upper and lower cowl halves together, and attaching the
 cowl to the aircraft firewall. An aluminum hinge with rolled or “open” eyes, AN257-P3, is used to join the upper and
 lower cowls.
 The pins on all these hinges must be replaced with the hardened stainless steel wire supplied separately with the
 kit. The pin supplied by the hinge manufacturer is soft aluminum and is inadequate for our purposes. On the side
 and bottom segments, 1/8’’ pin is used. However, the curved hinge attaching the upper cowl requires a smaller pin,
 0.090” in diameter. This undersize pin can be pre-bent to the approximate curvature of the firewall top, and can be
 inserted into the curved piano hinge. It would be impossible to use 1/8'' pin in the curved hinges.
 Hinges are attached to the fiberglass cowl with rivets, or rivets supplemented by bonding for best results. The rivets
 used are AN426AD3-4 countersunk head rivets, selected because of their small heads blend well with the fiberglass
 of the cowl and because their setting pressure is much lower than for 1/8'' AN rivets, so they do not crush the
 fiberglass. AVEX CS4-4 blind rivets also work well.
 The forward fuselage has been constructed with a forward sloping upper firewall, so the attachment hinge will
 naturally lay flush with the fuselage skin and cowl. Install the hinges on the firewall (use shims as required). Make
 all the pins and fit the opposite halves of the hinges together
 Since there is the possibility that vibration could loosen rivets in fiberglass over time, we recommend supplemental
 bonding of the hinge to the cowl. This is an optional procedure, but the cost in weight and time is not great.
 Drill 1/4” holes in the hinge to provide more bond area for better adhesion. For best results, mix a slurry of epoxy,
 thickened with flox or cabosil and apply it to the inside of the cowl where the hinge will rest. Rough up the
 underside of the hinge with coarse sandpaper for better adhesion, and then cleco the hinge in place and install the
 rivets.
 Other adhesives could be used instead of the resin/glass mat combination. Any industrial grade epoxy glue should
 work well, as would fuel tank sealant. The main purpose of the adhesive is to relieve the rivets of some of the
 vibration forces which tend to loosen them. Bonding is an optional procedure and is not a requirement. The
 experience with Van's Aircraft prototype cowl installations has shown that AN426AD3 rivets work well when spaced
 at 1'' intervals and when set with a rivet squeezer rather than a rivet gun.
 Fit and drill the hinge shown in the Cowling Attach Detail of DWG 43 (RV-4), DWG 63 (RV-6), DWG 45 (RV-7/9),
 DWG 48 (RV-8), using the holes left open during fuselage construction. Note carefully the details of fitting and
 shimming shown in the various section details. Before fitting the cowl, pin the other half of these hinges in place.
 Don’t forget to taper the hinge segments shown in Detail F

 FITTING THE UPPER COWL
 RV cowls are made of fiberglass and epoxy resin. The glass cloth is filled with a precise amount of resin during
 manufacture. The result is known as “pre-preg” cloth. Two layers of cloth, separated by a honeycomb core are laid
 up in a mold and held by a vacuum bag, which applies even pressure to the entire surface. Heat is applied while
 the cloth is held in place. The heat triggers the resin, curing it while it is held in the mold. The result is a very
 strong, light, and accurate molded part.
 Because the cowl is made of epoxy, only epoxies must be used when bonding the inlet ducts or making any other
 additions/modifications.
 The best tools for cutting, trimming, and fitting the fiberglass cowls are a die grinder with a reinforced cutting disc
 (like those included in the Finishing Kit for cutting the canopy), coarse sandpaper, usually glued to straight edged
 sanding boards, and used drills/files. Try not to use your best drills and files, as fiberglass will dull them very
 quickly.
 The cowl is fitted to the fuselage as shown on the drawings. The edges of the cowl are a solid fiberglass layup, with
 no honeycomb core. There is adequate “flange” around the perimeter to allow trimming without encountering the
 honeycomb.
 Cut the oil filler access opening out of the upper cowl. This door is supplied separately and will be installed later,
 but you will need the access hole when fitting the cowl. Be sure to smooth the edges of the opening or tape them
 to protect your arms when working inside.


 Fit the cowl halves together at the front, sanding & filing the flanges and thick areas to get a good fit. The spinner
 opening should be round (height the same as the width). You may have to sand the flanges slightly shorter on the
 top cowl so that when they nest you get the proper shape.


12 11/29/12
                                                        12-3
                                             SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES


Mark the screw pattern for joining the top & bottom behind the spinner. Clamp the top & bottom together at the
spinner and drill the screw locations with a #40 drill to allow for slight repositioning later if required.
The cowl top has been molded with trim margins on the sides and rear. In order to fit it in place, it will first be
necessary to trim the rear to conform with the firewall. The desired spacing between the front flange of the cowl
and the spinner is 1/4”. An absolute minimum of 1/8'' could be tolerated, and any gap of more than 3/8” would
appear excessive.
The cowl is supplied slightly longer than necessary. This means that it will overlap the fuselage skin at the firewall.
Variations from one airplane to another make it impossible to determine the exact trim line at the factory.
Mark a reference line on the fuselage side skin 2 inches back from the edge. Then when the cowl is placed in
temporary position, it is a simple matter to measure back to the hidden skin edge and mark the cowl for trimming.
With this method, it is possible to get a near perfect fit on the first cut. Some additional grinding or sanding of the
edge may be necessary.
Level the fuselage side to side. Set the top cowl in place. Block the forward end up to be 1/8” to 3/16” below the
spinner to allow for future engine sag. Check that the front is level from side to side. Mark the aft edge by using the
reference marks on the skin and trim to fit. Sand the edge straight, mark and pre-drill for the rivets. Replace the
top, drill and cleco to the hinge.

FITTING THE LOWER COWL
There are three different lower cowls, each specific to an engine type. Be certain you have the correct lower cowl
for your engine -- O-320, (I)O-360 180 hp, or IO-360 (200 hp). Lower cowls for the O-320 and (I)O-360 180 hp
engines have an induction scoop molded on. Lower cowls for the IO-360 200 hp engine have no induction scoop
and assume the use of Van’s Horizontal Induction System.
When the upper cowl fits the fuselage, drill and cleco it to the firewall hinge in two or three places. Clamp it to the
spinner back plate, or wood disc on the crank flange. When the position of the upper cowl is fixed, the lower cowl is
fitted to the fuselage.
If this is a tri-gear, cut the slot in the lower cowl to clear the nose gear leg. The length of this slot will depend on the
propeller…a 3-blade prop will require a longer slot to remove the cowl.
Lift the bottom cowl into place, cleco at the front and duct tape at the rear. The sides will not fit correctly yet, just
overlap the edges at this stage. Mark along the bottom and just around the curve, but not the sides. Trim the
bottom, reinstall the cowl, then mark and trim the sides. Trimming the bottom first, allows the cowl to be lifted in to
the proper position to trim the sides.
Drill the bottom to the hinges, starting at the bottom, then working up the sides. Trim and sand the sides of the
bottom to fit the top. Fit the hinge to the bottom of the cowl first. Reinstall the top cowl and drill to the hinges.
Install the screws and nutplanes behind the spinner shown in on the drawings.
Align the bottom of the cowl as closely as possible with the fuselage bottom. The sides can shift slightly up or down
by flexing the lower corners of the cowl. If this radius corner of the cowl aligns with the radius of the fuselage
corner, the position is correct. The aft edge of the cowl will overlap the firewall and fuselage side skin.
Trim the cowl using the same method described for the top cowl. Tape the cowl to the fuselage and clamp it to the
spinner back plate at the front.
At this point both top and bottom cowls are attached to the fuselage. They should form a smooth even joint along
the sides and behind the spinner.
When both halves of the cowl fit, finish drilling the holes for the hinges along the fuselage. If it has been necessary
to drill a few extra holes during fitting, these can be filled when the hinges are bonded in. Drill the holes in the short
section of overlap behind the spinner as shown on Detail C.
When both top and bottom cowls are clecoed to the hinges along the firewall, remove the clamps at the spinner and
pull the pins holding the top cowl to the firewall. Remove the upper cowl.
When the cowl halves match, the side hinges may be fitted and drilled to the lower cowl. See Section N-N’ and
Section P-P’, DWG 45 or 48. Allowing the hinge to “drift” slightly upward as it moves aft will make the cowl easier to
remove.




12 11/29/12
                                                        12-4
 SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES



 MODIFYING THE COWL FOR THE RV NOSEGEAR LEG
 A slot is cut in the lower cowl, or induction air scoop (depending on the engine) just wide enough to fit around the
 gear leg. When the lower cowl is installed, the lower brace is fitted as shown on View U-U, DWG 48 (RV-8A), View
 T-T, DWG 45 (RV-7A-9A), DWG 61 (RV-6A).
 The cover plate is fabricated from two pieces of aluminum sheet. The narrower sheet fits on the inside of the slot
 cut into the lower cowl, and the wider sheet spans the gap. Screws and nutplates hold the cover plate to the cowl.
 RV-8 note that one screw in the center of the cover plate attaches it to the U-816 brace.
 Those using the 200 hp IO-360 will find that the cluster of tubes at the bottom of the engine mounts hangs slightly
 below the bottom of the cowl, so an intersection fairing will improve the appearance noticeably. While this is not
 true for those using the O-320/O-360 induction scoop, an intersection fairing will still clean up the junction both
 aesthetically and aerodynamically. Fabricate a fairing using the same techniques as the gear leg intersection
 fairings described in Section 10 and DWG C3.

 INSTALLING THE INLET DUCTS
 A detail on the drawing illustrates the installation of the cooling air inlet ducts. These are essential for proper engine
 cooling. While the inlet ducts and the cowl itself tend to be flexible by themselves, when bonded together they
 become quite rigid. Thus, the cowl should be installed on the airplane, and all fasteners installed, the ducts are
 bonded on. Otherwise, the upper and lower cowls may not match each other once the ducts are in place.
 Fit the ducts to cowl, trimming and sanding as necessary for a good fit. Drill and cleco them in place. Clean the
 area to be bonded by sanding with a coarse (40-60 grit) disc sander. Sand away the glossy surface of the resin
 until the fibers of the glass cloth are exposed on all the mating surfaces.
 The only way to hold the ducts to the cowl while bonding them is to drill holes and use clecos. These holes can later
 be filled with resin. Enough clecoes should be used to assure contact at all points. Once the ducts are in place, the
 cowl should be pinned in place on the airframe before the resin cures. This prevents any possibility of shifting out of
 alignment.
 After the resin cures, use coarse sandpaper to remove the rough edges and oozes. Sanding with progressive
 grades of sandpaper will result in a smooth and pleasing surface.

 INSTALLING THE OIL FILLER DOOR
 A recess for the oil filler door is molded into the upper cowl. The door itself is supplied as a separate molded piece
 with trim lines scribed in the surface.
 A scribe line on the cowl marks the shape of the opening. Cut this out with a disc or hacksaw blade. Make sure the
 edges are smoothly finished or you will regret it later. The upper cowl pins are installed though this opening, which
 requires sticking your arm in a lot farther than just reaching the dipstick.
 Trim the door to its finished shape and tape it in place on the cowl.
 The hinge and fasteners are installed as shown on the drawing.

 FINISHING THE SURFACE OF THE COWL
 Epoxy pre-preg structures like the cowl are pressed into the mold during curing by vacuum pressure. This process
 precludes the use of the traditional gel coat, so the outside surface must be filled after the cowl is removed from the
 mold. If this step is omitted, the painted surface will be covered with pinholes -- not a pretty sight.
 The following is the process that the prototype shop has found to be a fast and efficient way to prep the prepreg cowlings for paint.
 This is not the only way, it is just what works for us.
 STEP 1: Fit the cowling fit to the fuselage, with all the hinges, retaining screw holes, and nut plates installed. Leave the oil door
 installation for later. Sand the entire surface with 80 grit sandpaper , being careful not to remove too much material and damage the
 core.
 STEP 2: When the cowling is completely sanded, use an air hose to blow off the dust, paying close attention to the voids in the
 finish. These areas must be clean for the resin to adhere. Mix a small amount of epoxy resin (about 1 oz. We use West Systems
 105 resin and 205 hardener, but any good epoxy will work.) Thin the resin about 1 to 1 with acetone (or approved product
 recommended by the epoxy manufacturer). This may seem thin but it works well. Use a cheap bristle paintbrush (not a foam one)
 to cover the cowling with a thin coat and let it dry overnight. If the resin begins to thicken while you are applying it, just thin it with
 more acetone.



12 11/29/12
                                                                 12-5
                                                   SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES


STEP 3: When the resin has dried, block sand it with 80 grit. At this point you are just trying to remove the high spots. Blow the
cowl off and look closely for any large voids or depressions. Most will be found at outside corners and where the core and the foam
end. Mix a marble sized portion of polyester (“bondo”) body filler -- the filler will dry fast so do not mix too much. Use a popsicle stick
to fill the larger areas and use a new single edge razor blade as a squeegee to fill smaller voids and pinholes.. Come back across
the area with the razor blade at a 90 degree angle to remove extra filler. Work a small area at a time. After the filler has dried sand
the areas with 80 grit and blow off the cowl. Extra time spent on this part will pay off later. Now repeat step 2.
STEP 4: If you are not going to paint or if you are going to wait until after you fly the plane( this is understandable if the weather is
nice and you don't have something else to fly) stop here. The resin coat will protect your cowl from grease and grime until you are
ready to paint. When that day comes, sand again with 80 grit and apply a filler-surfacer. We use Featherfill made by Evercoat.
There are other brands and they will probably work fine. Just follow the directions on the can. After the feather fill has dried, sand
down to 400 grit and apply your paint system.


PROTECTING THE INTERIOR OF THE COWL
The fiberglass cowling can be damaged by excessive heat radiating from the exhaust pipes. Van’s recommends covering the
inside of the cowl with reflective, heat-resistant material similar to the EA EXHST/COWL SHIELD supplied in Van’s Firewall Forward
kits. Make paper patterns for the areas on the inside surface of the cowl where protection is required. The cowl shield will also
protect the fiberglass from oil/fuel drips as well as heat, so consider applying it to the majority of the lower cowl.

Prepare the cowl by sanding the interior smooth with 80-100 grit sandpaper. Clean the sanding residue away and roll, sponge, or
brush a layer of thinned epoxy resin over the sanded area. The goal is a lightweight glossy smooth surface – but brush/roller marks
are not significant. Once the resin has cured, cut the adhesive backed cowl shield material to match the paper patterns. Peel the
backing from the shield and begin applying the shield to the cowl. Make sure it is exactly where it needs to be -- the adhesive is fast-
acting and strong, so re-positioning the shield once it’s attached is impractical. Work carefully and, as much as possible, avoid
wrinkles. Rub the entire surface with a stiff plastic squeegee, working the inevitable wrinkles and bubbles to an edge.

SPINNER INSTALLATION
Before installing the spinner, be sure you have the correct parts for YOUR propeller. Constant-speed, wood or fixed
pitch metal propellers require different parts. On the constant-speed propeller, the back plate mounts to the hub of
the prop and is reinforced with an aluminum ring. The front plate is a different size, as well. Follow the installation
instructions included in the constant-speed spinner kit and DWG C4.
The following instructions describe mounting the spinner on a fixed pitch propeller. If you are installing a Sensenich
fixed-pitch metal prop, use the appropriate front plate.
The S-601-1 spinner is a translucent cone shaped fiberglass molding. Cut-outs are made for the prop blades. The
cone is fitted over the prop hub and fastened to two flanged aluminum mount plates, installed on the front and rear
faces of the prop.
The rear spinner mount plate is the main structural mount, and the front plate provides alignment and stability to the
spinner. Because of the tapering cone shape of the spinner, the required diameter of the front plate will vary with
the thickness of the prop hub. The prop cut-outs in the spinner must be sized to the cross section of the prop being
used, and will vary considerably with props supplied by different manufacturers. Sometimes there are noticeable
differences between props of the same manufacturer. Since it is desirable to achieve a close fit of the spinner cut
out to the prop, it is suggested that the cut out be custom tailored to the specific prop being used.
Before installing the S-602-1 and S-605 (or S-605SEN) spinner mount plates to the prop, fit them to the spinner.
This will verify that the prop hub thickness corresponds to the relative diameters of the mount plates. It is
imperative that the mount plates be placed in the spinner perpendicular to its center line. This can be checked by
measuring equal distances from the plate to the rear skirt of the spinner all around. When both the front and rear
plates are aligned with the spinner and with each other, the distance between them will be the required thickness of
the prop hub.
If the distance is greater than the thickness of your prop hub, spacers may be installed between the front plate and
the forward surface of the prop. These spacers are available through Van's Accessories Catalog. If the distance is
less than the thickness of your prop hub, a smaller front plate will be required. Sometimes, if the mis-fit is very
slight, sanding the inside of the spinner will allow the front plate to fit. Keep this sanding to a minimum to avoid
weakening the spinner bowl.
Mount the rear plate on the back side of the prop and the front plate on the forward face of the prop or whatever
spacers the prop requires, and under the crush plate. Install and tighten the prop bolts to the prop manufacture's
recommendations.



12 11/29/12
                                                               12-6
 SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES


 The cutout in the spinner cone should match the contour of the prop blade closely. A sliding pin “copycat”
 contouring tool, widely available at hardware stores, can make the job easy. If you do not have such a tool, use a
 sheet of single ply (shoebox type) cardboard to make a hole template for the prop. Using the cardboard to simulate
 the spinner, align the edge of the cardboard with the rear edge of the rear mount and cut out an opening just large
 enough to clear the prop blade. If this piece is carefully cut and removed, it may be used later to fill in behind the
 prop. If not, the gap behind the prop must be filled with a separate aluminum plate riveted to the back plate. It may
 require a couple of tries to achieve the desired shape.
 On the spinner, mark two points at the rear edge exactly opposite each other, 180 opposed. Mark one point and
 then measure the circumference of the opening. Divide the circumference by two to determine the location of the
 opposing mark. Then lay the cardboard template on the spinner aligned with one of the marks, and mark the cut
 out. Repeat for the opposing cut out.
 The fiberglass can be cut with a tin snips or a cutting disc on a die grinder or Dremel tool. Because the tin snips
 crush the fiberglass, cut about 1/16'' inside the marked line and then use coarse sandpaper to enlarge the opening.
 Fit the spinner onto the prop. Chances are that the opening will not be quite large enough. Progressively enlarge
 the openings as needed until they have approximately 1/16 to 1/8'' clearance from the prop blade. You do not want
 a contact fit because there is enough movement between spinner and prop during operation to cause the edge of
 the spinner to cut into the prop.
 If the prop is thinner than the spinner plates were designed for, it may be necessary to build up the inside of the
 spinner to mate with the flange of the front plate.
 A fiberglass build up can be molded in place. Mark a ring around the inside of the spinner where it contacts the
 front plate flange. Then lay up a ring of fiberglass mat 3/4'' wide around this ring. Wax the spinner flange so it will
 not bond to the spinner. Slip the spinner with the wet lay-up into place and hold with clecos. When it is cured, the
 spinner can be removed and any roughness in the reinforcement fiberglass can be sanded smooth. Remember
 that anything added to the spinner should be evenly distributed around the circumference to help maintain balance.
 The spinner should be aligned with the axis of the crankshaft so it does not “wobble” as it spins. This requires that
 the prop and spinner be mounted on the engine. First, align the spinner as closely as possible and tape it to the
 bulkhead. Then, mark a point in the exact center of the nose of the spinner. Stand a step ladder up in front of the
 spinner with a pencil clamped to it and place the pencil point near at the mark on the spinner nose. Remove a
 spark plug from each cylinder so that the prop can be rotated easily and safely. If the spinner is in perfect
 alignment, its tip will remain in position with the pencil point through full 360 degree rotation. If not, reposition prior
 to drilling.
 While the spinner is still in place, cut out the gap filler plate to be used on the back side of the prop. Make this plate
 of aluminum between 0.040” and 0.063'' thick, or use the fiberglass piece removed when the spinner was first fitted.
 DWG C4 shows the fabrication and installation of this gap filler. It is riveted to the back plate and stays in place as
 the spinner is installed and removed. The flange shown riveted to the long edge of the gap filler is essential and
 should not be overlooked. The primary forces acting on the spinner are centrifugal, and without this flange which
 ties the gap fairing to the spinner, it would bend outward and tear off.
 Drill and cleco all holes in the rear mount plate; then progress forward to the front plate. While the spinner screws
 are #8 size and require a #19 drilled hole, we suggest drilling the holes to 1/8'' (#30) initially. A 1/8'' cleco can then
 be used to hold the K1000-08 nutplate in place while it is being drilled and riveted. Cleco the nutplate to the outside
 of the mount plate flange and use it as a drill guide. Remove the nutplate, machine countersink the holes for
 AN426AD3-3.5 rivets, drill out the screw hole to #19, and rivet the nutplate on.
 The spinner is one of the most critical of the non-structural parts on an airplane. While it doesn't support any
 productive loads, it is subject to considerable internal forces. Any weight imbalance can cause high loads on the
 spinner mounts. In addition, the reversing, pulsating, loads caused by the intermittent combustion of the engine
 come to bear on the spinner installation. Therefore, it is necessary to mount the spinner firm and true; to prevent it
 from destroying itself. Use 14 equally spaced #8 screws in the rear mount plate and 6 in the front plate. Place
 screws holes 5/8” from the edge of the prop hub cut-out, and then equally spaced around the circumference. Rivet
 K1000-08 nutplates to the inside of the spinner mount flanges. The front plate should fit snugly in the spinner.
 If you wish to use countersunk screws (many builders are satisfied with roundhead) the holes in the spinner may be
 machine countersunk for AN509-8R8 screws and countersunk washers. If you do not have a #19 piloted machine
 countersink, the spinner holes can be countersunk while they are still 1/8'' diameter.




12 11/29/12
                                                         12-7
                                        SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES



 ENGINE BAFFLE INSTALLATION
 Cutting and bending the many sheet metal components of a complete baffle system is a tedious task. Almost all RV
 builders choose to buy the optional baffle plans or the complete baffling sets available in Van's Accessories
 Catalog. These include installation drawings and instructions.




12 11/29/12
                                                  12-8
 SECTION 12: FITTING THE COWL, SPINNER & COOLING BAFFLES



                                       NOTES




12 11/29/12
                                          12-9
