                                                                                                                           VAN'S AIRCRAFT, INC.




                        IMPORTANT INFORMATION!

              READ THIS BEFORE YOU START BUILDING!
                                                                             Enjoy your project and remember this...
Your life and the lives of those riding in your plane will depend on your
attention to detail and safety while building this aircraft.

The documentation provided with your kit is quite comprehensive but
does not include all the information that you will need to complete an
airworthy aircraft. Your previous experience and choice of systems

documentation provided with the Kit. If you are not absolutely sure about
the correct/safest way to complete a particular step during your
build, STOP! ...seek help from an experienced, knowledgeable person
and/or research that step until you are confident that you have
the necessary detail to complete the step in a safe, airworthy manner!

There are many supplemental sources of information on safe, industry
accepted standards for completing any of the tasks involved in building an

Support or even a simple web search will often provide all the information
a person needs to safely complete a build step.

We strongly recommend that you utilize these and other sources of
supplemental information whenever possible and ALWAYS when
there is any question as to the correct/safest way to complete a
specific step during the build.
                                                                                           Captain A. G. Lamplugh,
                                                                                       British Aviation Insurance Group,
                                                                                           London. c. early 1930's.




                                                                                                                            DATE: 12/02/15 REVISION:   0   RV-ALL PAGE: 01-00
